National Electric Power Regulatory Authority 
Islamic Republic of Pakistan 
NEPRA Tower, Attaturk Avenue (East), G-511, Islamabad 
Ph: +92-51-9206500, Fax: +92-51 -2600026 
Web: www.nepra.org.pk, E-mail: registrar@nepra.org.pk  
No. NEPRA/DG(CAD)/TCD-10// January 13, 2021 
Chief Executive Officer, 
Faisalabad Electric Supply Company Ltd. 
Abdullahpur, Canal Bank Road 
Faisalabad 
Chief Executive Officer, 
Gujranwala Electric Power Company Ltd. 
565/A, Model Town 
G.T. Road, Guj ranwala 
Chief Executive Officer, 
Hyderabad Electric Supply Co. Ltd. 
WAPDA Offices Complex, 
Hussainabad, Hyderabad 
Chief Executive Officer 
Islamabad Electric Supply Co. Ltd. 
Street # 40, Sector G-7/4, 
Islamabad. 
Chief Executive Officer, 
Lahore Electric Supply Company Ltd. 
22-A, Queens Road, 
Lahore 
Chief Executive Officer 
Multan Electric Power Co. Ltd. 
MEPCO Headquarter, Khanewal Road 
Multan 
Chief Executive Officer, 
Peshawar Electric Supply Company Ltd. 
WAPDA House, Shami Road, 
Sakhi Chashma, Peshawar 
Chief Executive Officer 
Quetta Electric Supply Company Ltd. 
Zarghoon Road, 
Quetta 
Chief Executive Officer, 
Sukkur Electric Power Company Ltd. 
Administration Block, 
Thermal Power Station, 
Old Sukkur, 
Chief Executive Officer 
Tribal Areas Electricity Supply Company Limited 
(TESCO) 
Room No. 213, 1St  Floor, WAPDA House, Shami 
Road, Sakhi Chashma, Peshawar 
Chief Executive Officer 
K-Electric Limited (KEL) 
KE House, Punjab Chowrangi, 
39 — B, Sunset Boulevard, Phase-TI 
Defence Housing Authority, Karachi. 
Chief Executive Officer 
Bahria Town (Private) Limited 
Sector-E, Bahria Expressway, 
Safari Homes, Phase-Vill, 
Rawalpindi, Ph: 5731004 — 6 
Subject: CONSUMER SERVICE MANUAL — JANUARY 2021  
Reference is made to NEPRA's letter No. NEPRA/ADG(CAD)/TCD-10/17081-132 
dated 8th  July 2020 regarding the subject matter. 
2. The Consumer Service Manual (CSM) was revised, in consultation with all 
stakeholders, and conveyed to the Distribution Companies to ensure compliance. Further, the 
Distribution Companies were also advised to submit their suggestions / further improvements 
/ modifications (if any) for consideration of the Authority. In response, the Distribution 
Companies submitted their suggestions and accordingly two consultative sessions were held 
on November 2020 and 8t1t  December 2020 at NEPRA Head Office, Islamabad, wherein 
all Distribution Companies, including K-Electric, participated. Moreover, a hearing was 
xclusively granted to K-Electric on 7th  January 2021 w.r.t a few issues raised by them. 
Page 1 of4 
3. Accordingly, most of the suggestions given by the Distribution Companies have been 
considered and incorporated in the CSM. The revised CSM, approved by the Authority, is 
enclosed for compliance, and copy of the same be also placed on official website(s) of all 
Distribution Companies. 
End: As above 
O 2\ 
(Syed Safeer Hussain) 
Registrar 
Copy to: 
Secretary 
Ministry of Energy, Power Division, 
A' Block, Pak Secretariat 
Islamabad 
2 Secretary, 
Energy Department. 
Government of the Punjab. 
8th Floor, EFU House, Main Gulberg, 
Jail Road, Lahore 
3 Secretary 
Energy Department 
Government of Sindh 3rd Floor, State Life Building No. 3, 
Opposite CM House, 
Dr. Zai-ud-Din Ahmad Road, 
Karachi 
4 Secretary 
Energy and Power Department 
Government of Khyber Pakhtunkhwa, 
First Floor, A-Block, 
Abdul Wali Khan Multiplex, 
Civil Secretariat, Peshawar 
5 Secretary 
Energy Department 
Government of Balochistan 
Civil Secretariat, Zarghoon Road, 
Quetta 
6 Managing Director 
Pakistan Electric Power Company 
(PEPCO) 
721 -WAPDA House 
Shahrah-e-Quaid-e-Azarn, Lahore 
7 Managing Director 
Lasbela Industrial Estate 
Development Authority (LIEDA), 
HUB Chowki, 
Balochistan. 
8 Secretary DHA 
Defence Housing Authority, 
Main Office Complex, 
Sector A, Commercial Area, Phase VI 
Lahore Cantt. 
9 Chief Engineer! 
Customer Services Director, 
Faisalabad Electric Supply 
Company Ltd. 
Abdullahpur, Canal Bank Road 
Faisalabad 
10 Chief Engineer! 
Customer Services Director, 
Gujranwala Electric Power Company Ltd. 
565/A, Model Town 
G.T. Road, Gujranwala 
11. Chief Engineer! 
Customer Services Director, 
Hyderabad Electric Supply Co. Ltd. 
WAPDA Offices Complex, 
Hussainabad, Hyderabad 
12 Chief Engineer! 
Customer Services Director, 
Islamabad Electric Supply Co. Ltd. 
Street # 40, Sector G-7!4, 
Islamabad. 
Page I 2 of4 
13 Chief Engineer! 
Customer Services Director, 
Lahore Electric Supply Company 
Ltd. 
22-A, Queens Road, Lahore 
14 Chief Engineer! 
Customer Services Director, 
Multan Electric Power Co. Ltd. 
MEPCO Headquarter, Khanewal Road, 
Multan 
15 Chief Engineer! 
Customer Services Director, 
Peshawar Electric Supply Company 
Ltd., WAPDA House, Shami Road, 
Sakhi Chashma, Peshawar 
16 Chief Engineer! 
Customer Services Director, 
Quetta Electric Supply Company Ltd. 
Zarghoon Road, Quetta 
17 Chief Engineer! 
Customer Services Director, 
Sukkur Electric Power Company 
Ltd. 
Administration Block, 
Thermal Power Station, 
Old Sukkur. 
18 Chief Engineer! 
Customer Services Director, 
Tribal Areas Electricity Supply Company 
Limited (TESCO) 
Room No. 213, 1st  Floor, WAPDA House, 
Sakhi Chashma Shami Road,Peshawar 
19 Mr. Ayaz Jaffer Ahrned, 
Director (Finance & Regulations) 
K-Electric Limited (KEL) 
KE House, Punjab Chowrangi, 
39 — B, Sunset Boulevard, Phase-TI 
Defence Housing Authority 
Karachi. 
20 Chief Executive Officer 
Bahria Town (Private) Limited 
Sector-E, Bahria Expressway, 
Safari Homes, Phase-Vill, 
Rawalpindi 
Ph: 5731004 - 6 
21 President, 
Islamabad Chamber of Commerce & 
Industry,Chamber House, 
Aiwan-e-Sanat-o-Tij arat Road, 
Mauve Area, G-81 1, Islamabad. 
22 President, 
Gujranwala Chamber of Commerce & 
Industry, 
Aiwan-e-Tij arat Road, 
Uujranwala. 
23 President, 
Lahore Chamber of Commerce & 
Industry, 11-Shara-e-Aiwan-e- 
Sanat-o-Tijarat, Lahore. 
24 President, 
Faisalabad Chamber of Commerce & 
Industry, FCCI Complex, East Canal 
Road, Faisalabad. 
25 President, 
Multan Chamber of Commerce & 
Industry, Shahrah-e-Aiwan-e- 
Tijarat-o-Sanat, Kalma Chowk, 
Multan. 
26 President, 
Quetta Chamber of Commerce & Industry, 
Chamber Building, Zarghoon Road, 
P.O Box 117, Quetta Cantt. 
27 President, 
Sarhad Chamber of Commerce & 
Industry, G.T Road, Peshawar. 
28 President 
Karachi Chamber of Commerce & 
Industry, P.O Box 4158, Aiwan-e-Tijarat 
Road, Off: Shahrah — e-Liaqat, Karachi 
29 President, 
Sukkur Chamber of Commerce & 
Industry, I St Floor, Sukkur Chamber 
House, Bunder Road, 
Sukkur. 
30 President, 
Hyderabad Chamber of Commerce & 
Industry, 
Building 41!488, Mezzanine Floor, 
Aiwan-e-Tij arat Road, Saddar, 
Hyderabad. 
Page I 3 of4 
31 Mr. Saad Zaman 
Proprietor New City Arcade 
management Services, 
Comercial Avenue M-40, 
New City Phase-lI, 
Motorway Wah Cantt. 
32 Mr. Au Tariq, 
Group Financial Controller 
Maverick Developer (Pvt) Limited, 
1 9E!II Gulberg III, 
Lahore. 
33 INDIGO Developer 
Plot #3-C/Ill, 
Noor Jehan Road Gulber 3, 
Lahore. 
34 Project Director, 
Pakistan Atomic Energy Commission 
Foundation Housing Scheme, 
Lahore. 
35 Syed Perwaiz Hussain Pak HK 
Developer 
11km, Main Boulevard Gulberg-II 
Lahore. 
36 President, Association of Builders and 
Developers of Pakistan (ABAD), 
ST-lID, Block-16, Gulistan-e-Jauhar. 
Karachi-75290 
Tele: 021 —3461 3645 
Cell #0321 —3893 695 
37 Secretary 
Defense Housing Authority (DHA), 
Phase-i, Sector-F, 
Commercial Block, Expressway, 
DHA, Islamabad 
Tele: 051 —5400 141-3 
Fax: 051-5400 140 
38 Mr. Sand Zaman Proprietor 
New City Commercial Avenue 
M-40,New City Phase-Il, 
Motorway Wah Cantt 
39 Mr. Ali Tariq, 
Group Financial Controller 
Maverick Developer (Pvt.) Limited, 
19E111 Gulberg 3, Lahore 
40 Syed Perwaiz Hussain 
Pak HK Developer,1 1km, 
Main Boulevard Gulberg-II Lahore 
41 Mr. Zeeshan Saleem, 
Saima Real Estate Builders & 
Developers, Survey No. 72, Deh 
Jam Chakro, Opposite Sector 1-A/4, 
North Karachi. 
Page I 4 of 4 
CONSUMER SERVICE MANUAL 
(JANUARY 2021) 
I UUIV (11 ,UIILe11IS 
CHAPTER 1 PRELIMINARIES 1 
CHAPTER 2 NEW CONNECTION/ SHIFTING OF CONNECTION / CHANGE OF NAME 
/EXTENSION OF LOAD I REDUCTION OF LOAD/ CHANGE OF TARIFF 9 
CHAPTER 3 RELOCATION OF DISTRIBUTION FACILITY AND TEMPORARY CONNECTION 
28 
CHAPTER 4 METERING INSTALLATION 33 
CHAPTER 5 SECURITY DEPOSIT 38 
CHAPTER 6 METER READING AND BILLING 40 
CHAPTER 7 45 
'l'ARIFF 45 
CHAPTER 8 DISCONNECTION AND RECONNECTION 48 
CHAPTER 9 54 
DISHONEST ABSTRACTION, CONSUMPTION OR USE OF ENERGY 54 
ChAPTER 10 CONSUMER COMPLAINTS 58 
CHAPTER 11 DISTRIBUTION AND CONSUMER SUB STATION 62 
CHAPTER 12 SAFETY AND SECURITY 64 
CHAPTER 13 EFFICIENT USE AND CONSERVATION OF ELECTRIC POWER 68 
CHAPTER 14 RIGHTS AND OBLIGATIONS VIS-A-VIS CONSUMER AND DISCO 73 
CHAPTER 15 VIOLATION OF INSTRUCTIONS 76 
LIST OF ANNEXURES 77 
ANNEXURE -t AI'PLICATION FORM (FOR CONNECTION) 78 
ANNEXURE-Il POWER SUPPLY CONTRACT 83 
84 
ANNEXURE -IV SECURITY DEPOSIT RATES 87 
ANNEXURE - V PERCENTAGE OF LOAD FACTOR FOR DIFFERENT TYPES OF 
CONNECTIONS 88 
ANNEXURE - VI LOAD ASSESSMENT CRITERIA FOR HOUSING SOCIETIES, HIGH-RISE 
BUILDINGS, COMMERCIAL PLAZAS, MULTI-STOREY BUILDINGS, ETC. 89 
ANNEXURE - HI TIME FRAME FOR NEW CONNECTIONS 
pppROVED 
IHErt4OR 1'(  
S 
C 
CHAPTER 1 
PRELIMINARIES 
1.1 AIMS ANI) OBJECTIVES OF CONSUMER SERVICE MANUAL 
The Consumer Service Manual lays down the instructions in pursuance of Section 21 (d) of 
the Regulation of Generation, Transmission and Distribution of Electric Power Act, 1997 
read with Rule 9 of the NEPRA Licensing (Distribution) Rules, 1999 which shall be 
administered by a distribution licensee, O&M Operator, Electric Power Supplier, Authorized 
Agent, as the case may be, to ensure safe, effective and reliable supply of electric power to 
consumers. Pursuant to sub rule 6 of the ibid rule the Authority may from time to time direct 
the licensee to revise the Consumer Service Manual in such manner and with respect to such 
details as the Authority may direct, provided that the licensee shall not be required to revise 
Consumer Service Manual in a manner which may cause the licensee to be in breach of Laws 
or the applicable documents. 
1.2 SCOPE OF CONSUMER SERVICE MANUAL 
'The Consumer Service Manual is applicable to all consumers served by the distribution 
licensee (DISCO to insert its name), O&M Operator, Electric Power Supplier, Authorized 
Agent, as the case may be, including the Bulk Power Consumers and includes, without 
limitation to the following matters, namely: 
1.2.1 Form and manner of application by the consumer for obtaining electric service 
connection, along with detail of documents to be submitted in support of the 
application. 
1.2.2 Fees and charges for connection, installation of meters, other facilities for connection 
and reconnection. 
1.2.3 Procedure and manner for installation of meters and other facilities for connection. 
1.2.4 Time frame for providing service connection to consumers. 
2.5 Procedure and manner for billing, time limit of payment of bills and procedure for 
collection of bills. 
2.6 Procedure for issuing disconnection notice to consumer for non-payment of bills and 
the procedure thereof for disconnection of electric supply in case of non-payment and 
reconnection after payment of outstanding dues. 
1.2.7 Collection of arrears upon or following reconnection. 
1.2.8 Procedure for disconnection and the charges for illegal abstraction/theft of electric 
power or for use of electric power for purposes other than those specified in the 
application for connection and service. 
1 
1.2.9 Procedure and the time-frame for handling and redressal of different types of 
consumer complaints. 
1.2.10 Requirement of safety and security. 
1 .2.11 Efficient use of electric power including with reference to characteristics of supply 
or usage such as time of day, week or season. 
The Consumer Service Manual shall also act as the code of conduct of a distribution licensee, 
O&M Operator, Electric Power Supplier, Authorized Agent, as the case may be and to be 
used in conjunction with the provisions of Distribution Code, Performance Standards 
(Distribution) Rules, 2005 , Consumer Eligibility Criteria, 2003, and other Rules & 
regulations when and where applicable. 
1.3 INTERFACES WITH CONSUMER FORUMS 
DISCO (DISCO to insert its name) shall make efforts to have interface with the Consumer 
Forums! Councils and Associations. Efforts shall be made to improve DISCO (DISCO to 
insert its name)-Consumer relationship and the consumer's awareness about utility's 
programs! activities/services. Consumer Services Centers/One Window Operation shall 
operate round the clock. 
1.4 DEFINITIONS 
DISCO (DISCO to insert its name) operating in pursuance of the distribution license granted 
by National Electric Power Regulatory Authority (NEPRA) is allowed to charge only such 
tariff as approved by NEPRA. Such tariff provides for the terms and conditions of tariff 
applicable to different categories of consumers determined by NEPRA. A copy of the current 
applicable Tariff Terms and Conditions as approved by NEPRA is available at NEPRA 
website. The definitions of the following terms are accordingly as per the tariff 
determinations of NEPRA as amended from time to time: 
1. Agricultural Supply: 
2. Billing Demand: 
3. Billing Period: 
4. Energy Charges: 
5. Fixed Charges: 
6. General Service: 
7. General Supply: 
8. Maximum Demand: 
9. Industrial Supply: 
10. Maximum Demand Indicator (MDI): 
11. Month: 
12. Power Factor: 
2 
13. Circle: means the administrative area of jurisdiction within DISCO (DISCO to insert its 
name) headed by Manager I Superintending Engineer 
Common 1)istribution System (CDS): means the distribution system as defined in the 
onsumer Eligibility Criteria, 2003; 
ompany: means a company formed and registered under Companies Ordinance, 1984 
ompanies Act, 2017. 
2. Conductor: means a wire, cable or other form having suitable capacity for carrying 
OTHER DEFINITIONS 
13. Act: Means the Regulation of Generation, Transmission and Distribution of Electric 
Power Act 1997 
14. Applicable Documents: means the rules and regulations issued in pursuance of the Act 
by the Authority, from time to time, relating to the generation, distribution and 
transmission license, the Grid Code, the Distribution Code, Consumer Service Manual 
and any documents, instruments, approvals or authorizations issued or granted by the 
Authority in exercise of its power under the Act. 
15. Applicant: means any person who applies for provision of electric power service or for 
similar other purpose. 
16. Authority: means the National Electric Power Regulatory Authority established under 
Section 3 of the Act; 
17. Application: means a request to the authorized office of DISCO (DISCO to insert its 
name), O&M Operator, Electric Power Supplier, Authorized Agent, as the case may be 
for an electric service connection on the prescribed form. (Annex I); 
18. Bulk Power Consumer (BPC): means a consumer who purchases or receives electric 
power, at one premises, in an amount of one megawatt or more or in such other amount 
and voltage level and with such other characteristics as the Authority may determine and 
the Authority may determine different amounts and voltage levels and with such other 
characteristics for different areas; 
electrië current and used for movement or delivery of electricity; 
23. Connected Load: means total load in kilowatts (kW) that is connected to an electric 
supply system or installed at premises; 
24. Connecting Point: means the point where the dedicated distribution system of the 
applicant is connected with the existing Common Distribution System (CDS); 
25. Consumer: means a person or his successor-in —interest who purchases or receives 
electric power for consumption and not for delivery or re-sale to others, including a 
person who owns or occupies a premises where electric power is supplied; 
26. Consumer Eligibility Criteria, 2003: means criterion for a non-discriminatory 
provision of distribution service and sale of electric power to all the consumers within 
3 
APPROVED 
BY 
\THE AUTHORITY 
- 
NEPR1. 
the service territory of a distribution company prescribed by NEPRA vide SRO.743 
(1)/2003 dated July 26, 2003, as amended from time to time. 
27. Consumer's Mailing Address: means the address specified in the Application Form. 
28. Consumption: means the amount of electricity used and measured over a given period 
of time; 
29. Court: means the Court of Sessions designated as Electricity Utilities Court empowered 
to take cognizance of an offense under the provisions of Pakistan Penal Code, 1860 (Act 
XLV of 1860) and the Code of Criminal Procedure, 1898 (Act V of 1898); 
30. Declared Voltage: means the voltage required to be supplied at the consumers' terminals 
with permissible variations according to Performance Standards (Distribution) Rules, 
2005; 
31. Dedicated Distribution System (DOS): means that part of the distribution system, 
required to supply power for the sole consumption of an applicant and not for supplying 
power to any other consumer and shall comprise of the distribution system from the 
connecting point up to the interconnection point of the applicant including the metering 
and service wire and such other connection arrangement; 
32. Distribution Lines: mean overhead lines and/or underground facilities consisting of 
conduit and cable which are operated at nominal distribution voltages; 
33. Distribution Facilities: means electrical facilities operating at distribution voltage and 
used for movement or delivery of electric power; 
34. DISCO: means a utility/entity engaged in the business of distribution of electric power 
as licensed by NEPRA; 
Division: means the administrative area of jurisdiction within DISCO (DISCO to insert 
its name) headed by Deputy Manager / Executive Engineer 
Earthing or Grounding: means electrical connection to general mass of earth in such a 
manner as to ensure, at all times, an immediate discharge of energy; 
37. Electric Power Supplier: means a person who has been granted a license under the Act 
to undertake supply of electricity; 
38. Energy Meter: means a device that registers the quantity of electrical energy over a 
period of time; 
39. Force majeure: means an act of God that is reasonably not foreseeable by a distribution 
company or a force or cause beyond the reasonable control of a distribution company; 
40. I-lousing Society: means a society registered with the Registrar Cooperative Societies 
under the Cooperative Societies Act, 1925 duly approved by the concerned Local 
Municipal Authority; 
50. 
• APPROVED 
BY 
\THE AUTHQRITYJ! 
EP  
41. Interconnection Point: means the point where the metering installation and protection 
apparatus of the consumer is connected to the dedicated distribution system; 
42. Interruption: means loss of electric power to one or more consumers; 
43. Load Factor: means the ratio of average load over a designated period to the peak load 
in that period; 
44. Metering Installation: means the metering and associated equipment installed for 
recording consumption/usage of electric power of a consumer; 
45. NEPRA: means National Electric Power Regulatory Authority; 
46. Net Metering Facility: means a facility comprising of one or two meters for measuring 
the kWh generated by Distributed Generator and supplied by Distribution Company for 
determining the net energy; 
47. Nominal Voltage: means a suitable approximate value of voltage used to designate or 
identify a system; 
48. NTlC: means National Transmission and Dispatch Company; 
49. Operation and Maintenance (O&M) Agreement: means an agreement entered into 
between a Distribution Company and an 0&M Operator for the purpose of operation and 
maintenance, metering, billing and collection of bills in a specified area within the service 
territory of a Distribution Company on its behalf subject to approval of the Authority; 
Operation and Maintenance (O&M) Operator: means a person with whom the 
Operation & Maintenance Agreement is executed by a DISCO (DISCO to insert its 
names) in its service territory in terms of the NEPRA (Supply of Electric Power) 
Regulations 2015; 
Overloading: means a condition under which part of the system is subject to a electric 
power/current in excess of the normal design rating of that part of the system and not due 
directly to system fault current; 
Person: Shall include an association of persons, concern, company, firm or undertaking; 
,authority, or body corporate set up or controlled by the Federal Government or, as the 
case may be, the Provincial Government 
53. Power Factor: means the ratio of kWh to kVAh recorded during the month or the ratio 
of kWh to the square root of sum of square of kWh and kVARh. 
54. Premises: means the building/site /location where Electric Power is required/ consumed; 
55. Primary Service Connection: means any connection which is provided at 11 kV or 
above; 
56. Provincial Office of Inspection: means the office established by a Provincial 
overnment under Section 38 of the Act; 
57. Public Lighting Supply: means a supply given to a Government Department! Agency 
or a Flousing Society for public lighting, for the purpose of illuminating public lamps 
within the area of its jurisdiction; 
58. Running Load: means quantum of demand in kilowatts (kW), recorded by electricity 
measuring instrument at the consumer's premises at any given time interval. 
59. Rural Area: means the area falling within the jurisdiction of all rural local bodies 
including without limitation to Union Councils, Tehsil Councils and Zila Councils; 
60. Sanctioned Load: means the load in kilowatts (kW) sanctioned by DISCO (DISCO to 
insert its name); 
61. Service Drop: means the cable of appropriate current carrying capacity to connect the 
CDS/DDS to the premises at the inter connection point. The maximum length of this 
cable shall be such that the voltage at the inter connection point does not fall below the 
specified limits; 
62. Service Territory: means the area specified in the distribution license within which the 
licensee is authorized to conduct the distribution business and, subject to the provisions 
of Rule 7 of NEPRA Licensing (Distribution) Rules, 1999, the second-tier supply 
business; 
63. Second-tier supply business: means the authorized business, if any, of the licensee or 
any of its affiliates as a supplier, whether or not carried out pursuant to a power 
acquisition contract, of electric power to one or more bulk-power consumers within or 
without the Service Territory; 
f APPROVED 
AUTHORITY 
4. Service Wires or Connection: means the group of cables/conductors, whether overhead 
or underground, necessary to connect the service entrance conductors of the consumer to 
the DISCO's (DISCO to insert its name) supply line, regardless of the location of the 
ISCO's (DISCO to insert its name) meters or transformers; 
Sponsored Dedicated Distribution System: means where a Common Distribution 
System (CI)S) doesn't exist and is required to be developed for provision of service on 
behalf of expected applicants by any personlagency other than the applicant(s) such 
person/agency shall be called the Developer/Sponsor and such a system for the purpose 
of Consumer Eligibility Criteria, 2003, will be referred to as the "Sponsored Dedicated 
Distribution System (SDDS)". 
66. Sub-Division: means the administrative area of jurisdiction within DISCO (DISCO to 
insert its name) headed by Assistant Manager / Sub-divisional officer. 
67. Tariff Schedules: means the rates, charges, terms and conditions for generation of 
electric power, transmission, distribution services and sale of electric power to consumers 
by DISCO (DISCO to insert its name) as approved by NEIRA and notified by the 
Government of Pakistan. 
6 nderground Distribution System: means an electric distribution system with all wires 
installed underground except those wires within surface-mounted equipment enclosures. 
6 
69. Urban Area: means the area falling within the jurisdiction of all urban local bodies or 
development authorities including without limitation to '['own Committees, Municipal 
Committees, Municipal Corporations, Metropolitan Corporations and Cantonment 
Boards. 
70. Voltage: means difference of potential or "electric pressure" in an electrical circuit 
measured in volts; 
71. Voltage l)rop: means the reduction in the voltage between two reference points. 
72. Voltage Fluctuation: means a series of voltage changes or a cyclic variation of voltage. 
4ER R 
4. 
  
.fj APPROVED 
BY 
THE AUTHORITY 
*E PR/  
V 
7 
1.5 ACRONYMS I ABBREVIATIONS (TO BE UP1)ATEI) BY EACH 1)ISCO) 
AIS - Air Insulated Sub Station 
AMCS/RO Assistant Manager Customer Services/Revenue Officer 
AM(0)/SDO Assistant Manager (Operation) or Sub Divisional Officer 
AMR Automatic Meter Reading 
CE Chief Engineer 
CEC - Consumer Eligibility Criteria, 2003 
CEO Chief Executive Officer 
CNIC Computerize National Identity Card 
CP Form Commercial Procedure Form 
CSD Customer Services Director 
DCC - DISCO Computer Center 
I)CM - Deputy Commercial Manager 
DCO - Disconnection Order 
l)G (COM) - l)irector General, Commercial 
DISCO - Distribution Company 
l)M(0) or XEN- Deputy Manager (Operation) or Executive Engineer 
DN Demand Notice 
ERO Equipment Removal Order 
GIS - Gas Insulated Sub Station 
GM (CS) - General Manager (Customer Services) 
kWh Kilo Watt Hour 
LPS - Late Payment Surcharge 
LS I - Line Superintendent Grade — I 
LS II - Line Superintendent Grade — II 
M (COM) - Manager Commercial 
MCO - Meter Change Order 
MDI Maximum Demand Indicator 
M(0)/SE(0) Manager (Operation) or Superintending Engineer (Operation) 
MS I - Meter Supervisor Grade — I 
MS II Meter Supervisor Grade - II 
MSB - Meter Security Box 
NEPRA National Electric Power Regulatory Authority 
NOC No Objection Certificate 
P-Disc Permanent Disconnection 
P01 Provincial Office of Inspection 
RCO Reconnection Order 
SCO Service Connection Order 
SDC Sub Divisional Clerk 
SR - Store Requisition 
TD 'I'echnical Director 
ToU Time of Use 
The designations/offices in this manual have been mentioned keeping in view the 
nomenclature of XWDISCOs. K-Electric and other licensees are required to modify/amend 
the same in the whole manual as per their own organizational structure/nomenclature. 
8 
CHAPTER 2 
NEW CONNECTION! SHIFTING OF CONNECTION / CHANGE OF NAME 
!EXTENSION OF LOAD / REDUCTION OF LOAD! CHANGE OF TARIFF 
2.1 GENERAL INFORMATION 
Information desired from DISCO (DISCO to insert its name) relating to subject matters 
covered by this Manual may be obtained in person, by telephone, or by mail and is also 
available on the website of DISCO (DISCO to insert website address). 
A separate one-window operation facility in the sub-division is available in addition to the 
consumer service centers established by DISCO (DISCO to insert its name), to provide all 
necessary information required regarding application for new connections and all other 
matters relating to consumer services and provision of electric power services. 
2.2 APPLICATION FOR NEW CONNECTION 
2.2.1 Application Form (Annex-I) and Power Supply Contract Form (Annex - 
II) in English and Urdu are available free of charge in each sub-
division/divisionlcircle office of DISCO (DISCO to insert its name) and on 
website of DISCO. 
2.2.2 An applicant shall be required to fill in the forms and attach the required 
supporting documents as detailed therein. 
pppROVED 
BY 
I ThE pUThORtI 
.2.3 Any assistance or information required in filling the Application Form shall 
be provided to the applicant by DISCO (DISCO to insert its name) staff in 
the office where form is to be submitted. 
2.2.4 Applications for new connection along with supporting documents will be 
submitted in person or online at DISCO's (DISCO to insert its name) website. 
After the receipt of the application DISCO (DISCO to insert its name) shall 
issue acknowledgement receipt and allot a serial number/tracking ID/case ID 
to the applicant. In case, any documents are required; the applicant will be 
informed accordingly through letter/online/ernai 1/telephone. 
2.2.5 Demand Notice(s) may be sent to the applicant on the email address or 
through registered post/courier service or the applicant may collect the 
Demand Notice(s) in person or download it from the website of DISCO 
(DISCO to insert its name) through tracking ID/Case ID. 
'l'he applicant may pay the Demand Notice(s) online/in designated banks. 
Upon receipt/acknowledgement of payment; the connection shall be 
energized within the stipulated time period. 
Note: For applications submitted through modes other than in person, the applicant or his 
authorized representative may be required to visit concerned office of DISCO 
(DISCO to insert its name) with original! attested documents for verification before 
energization. 
2.3 I)OCUMENTS TO BE ATTACHEI) WITH THE APPLICATION FORM 
Documents to be attached with the Application Form for issuance of Demand Notice(s) 
are as follows: 
2.3.1 Ownership proof of the premises as determined by DISCO (DISCO to insert 
its name) where connection is required. Conversely provision of electricity 
connection does not necessarily constitute proof of ownership of the 
premises. 
2.3.2 An affidavit by the owner of the premises on non-judicial stamp paper worth 
Rs. 50/- as per schedule 1 of the Stamp Act 1899 (or as amended through 
Stamp Act, 1899 from time to time) to the effect that no connection existed 
previously at the premises for which connection is applied and that he/she 
shall pay DISCO (DISCO to insert its name) any outstanding dues in respect 
of any previous connection which existed at the premises in question, if 
noticed later on. Further, in the affidavit it will be mentioned that the applicant 
is not defaulter of any other electricity connection in the DISCO (DISCO to 
insert its name) or! and in any other distribution company, and if found at any 
stage, his/her connection may be disconnected after issuance of prior seven 
(07) days' notice. 
2.3.3 If the applicant is a tenant or a person other than the landlord then No 
Objection Certificate from the owner/landlord, along with the ownership 
proof and affidavit mentioned above are required. The LandlordlOwncr will 
also affirm on a non-judicial stamp paper worth Rs.50/- as per schedule 1 of 
the Stamp Act 1899 that he/she would be responsible for payment of the 
default amount of his/her tenant (if any). The connection can be disconnected 
on request of the owner/landlord of the premises if the tenant is defaulter of 
electricity bills consecutively for three months. 
2.3.4 Attested copies of CNIC of the applicant and a witness. In case of tenancy, 
attested copy of CNIC of the landlordlowner is also required. 
2.3.5 If the connection is applied in the name of a company, duly incorporated 
under the law, following additional documents shall be attached:- 
(a) Certificate of incorporation; 
(b) Resolution of Board of Directors authorizing a person to sign 
and execute the Power Supply Contract; 
(c) List of directors with complete addresses and copies of their 
computerized national identity cards. 
10 
2.3.6 Approved map or approved site plan or approved layout plan (LOP) or NOC 
by the Civic Agency/Authority. However, the condition of the approved map 
or approved site plan or approved layout plan or NOC for houses and shops 
can be relaxed by the DISCO (DISCO to insert its name) in case of rural areas 
where map /site plan /layout plan/NOC arc not applicable/required. 
There shall be no requirement of approved map or approved site plan or 
approved layout plan (LOP) or NOC by the Civic Agency/Authority for 
another connection or for extension1  reduction of load where already any permanent! 
regular connection exists at the premises. 
ii. There shall be no requirement of approved map or approved site plan or 
approved layout plan (LOP) or NOC by the Civic Agency/Authority for 
premises which are located inside approved housing schemes! societies/plazas/multi-
storey buildings. 
iii. There shall be no requirement of approved map or approved site plan or 
approved layout plan (LOP) or NOC by the Civic Agency/Authority in the 
areas where the land is either not acquired by the concerned Civic Agency/Authority 
or the area is not developed by concerned Civic Agency!Authority. 
It will be ensured before provision of connection that there are no restraining 
orders! Court orders with respect to non-provision of connection in the area. 
Wiring test report duly issued by Electric Inspector or his authorized wiring 
contractor 
2.3.8 In case of connection for stone crushing plants No Objection Certificate 
(NOC) from concerned Environmental Protection Agency is necessary. 
Further a separate room for protection of the metering installation •from the 
dust of stone crushing shall be provided by the applicant. 
2.4 CAPITAL COST/ CONNECTION CHARGES ANI) SECURITY DEPOSIT 
DEMANI) NOTICES 
Connection charges are payable according to the rates approved by the Authority pursuant 
to Rule 11 of the NEPRA Licensing (Distribution) Rules, 1999 and Article 9 of Distribution 
License 
 
2.4.1 l'he application will be processed and sanctioned as per the provisions of 
Consumer Eligibility Criteria, 2003 and DISCO's (DISCO to insert its name) 
Commercial Procedure Manual. The provisions of NEPRA Performance 
11 
iv. There shall be no requirement of approved map or approved site plan or 
approved layout plan (LOP) or NOC by the Civic Agency/Authority in the old 
colonies! abadies where the land belongs to the native people inherited from their 
forefathers. 
(I)istribution) Rules, 2005, Grid Code and Distribution Code will be adhered 
to where applicable. 
2.4.2 Demand notices of capital cost/connection charges and security deposit shall 
subsequently be issued simultaneously by the concerned DISCO (DISCO to 
insert its name) office for payment by the applicant. Demand Notices for 
capital cost! connection charges and Security Deposit shall be sent under 
registered post or courier or online to ensure their delivery to the applicant or 
applicant may receive the same personally, for that receipt may be obtained 
from the applicant for the record, or the applicant can download it from the 
website of DISCO (DISCO to insert its name) after providing its serial number 
/tracking ID/Case ID. 
2.4.3 A period of thirty (30) days for payment of Demand Notice is given. A grace 
period of thirty (30) days may be allowed for payment of the demand notices 
on the request of the applicant. Such request shall be submitted by the 
applicant at least three days prior to expiry date of payment of the demand 
notice. 
2.4.4 For payment, branches of designated banks authorized to receive the demand 
notice, and due date etc. shall be mentioned in the demand notice. The bank 
shall receive payment as per demand notice and issue an acknowledgement 
receipt etc. In case where online payment of demand notice facility is provided 
by DISCO (DISCO to insert its name), the applicant may pay the demand 
notice either online or at the designated bank authorized to collect the demand 
liotice. 
2.4.5 (DISCO to insert its name) shall determine new final priority number of 
connection to each application after the demand notices have been paid. 
2.4.6 Once Demand Notice has been issued by DISCO (DISCO to insert its name) and 
paid by the applicant in full, no further charges/demand notice can be raised against 
the applicant on account of escalation of cost of material. 
2.4.7 Payment of Demand Notices for capital cost! connection charges and security 
deposit (where work is to be carried out by the sponsor or by DISCO) may be 
allowed in installments on request of the applicant. However, if during that 
period escalation in cost of material occurs, the same shall be borne by the 
applicant. No mark- up shall be levied by the DISCO (DISCO to insert its 
name) for payment of demand notices in installments. The DISCO shall 
provide connection within the stipulated time period as given in Annexure-III 
after receipt of full payment from the consumer/applicant. 
12 
2.5 CONNECTION ChARGES 
The charges for installation of connection by DISCO (DISCO to insert its name) are as 
follows: 
i. Actual cost of material including 12% Store handling charges! 
Store issue rate = (X) 
ii. Installation charges = 8% of X 
jjj•  *El ectrification  Design vetting charges: 1.5% of X 
* Applicable for housing societies/high-rise buildings/commercial plazas! multi-storey 
buildings, etc. only. 
13 
2.6 REQUIREMENI' OF DEDICATED TRANSFORMERJ FEEDERJGRID 
STATION: 
Sr. Premises Type Load Connection Arrangement 
A-i (Residential) 
(not applicable in housing 
schemes/societies/colonies 
where ultimate load is 
determined) 
Upto 20 kW Common Distribution 'l'ransformer 
Above 20 kW 
to 100 kW 
Dedicated Transformer 
OR 
transformer sharing charges proportionate to 
load subject to availability of capacity/load in 
the distribution transformer 
Above 100 kW Dedicated Transformer. 
2 
A3 (General 
(For individual 
and not 
colonies/ 
where ultimate 
A2 (Commercial) 
housing schemes/societies/ 
plazas/buildings 
determined) 
Services) 
connections 
applicable in 
commercial 
etc. 
load is 
Upto 15 kW Common Distribution Transformer 
Above 15kW 
to 100 kW 
Dedicated Transformer. OR 
transformer sharing charges proportionate to 
load subject to availability of capacity/ load in 
the distribution transformer. 
Above 100 kW 
to 
2.5 MW 
(i) Dedicated Transformer(s) 
(ii) Rehabilitation charges on actual basis (if any) 
in case connection is provided from ii kV 
distribution feeder. (In case of A3 Connection; 
these charges will be applicable above 1 MW on 
actual basis, if any.) 
Above 2.5 MW 
to 5 MW 
(i) Dedicated Transformer(s) 
(ii) Dedicated 11kV Feeder(s) OR Feeder 
sharing charges proportionate to load subject to 
availability of capacity/load in the distribution 
feeder! grouping of feeders 
APPROVED 
THE AUTHORITYJ 
Jo 14 
Up to 15 kW Common Distribution Transformer 
(i) Dedicated Transformer(s) OR 
transformer sharing charges proportionate to 
load subject to availability of capacity/load in 
the distribution transformer 
(ii) Rehabilitation charges on actual basis (if 
any) in case connection is provided from 11 kV 
distribution feeder. 
Above 15 kW 
to 
1MW 
(iii) 50% Grid sharing charges including 
transmission line charges proportionate to load 
without cost of land. 
(i). Dedicated Transformer (s) 
(ii) Rehabilitation charges on actual basis, if 
any, in case connection is provided from 11 kV 
distribution feeder. 
(iii) 50% Grid sharing charges including 
transmission line charges proportionate to load 
without cost of land 
Above 1 MW 
to 
2.5 MW 
(i) Dedicated Transformer (s) 
(ii) Dedicated 11kV Feeder (s) 
(iii) 50% Grid sharing charges including 
transmission line charges proportionate to load 
without cost of land  
(i) Dedicated 'I'ransformer(s) 
(ii) Dedicated 11kV Feeder (s) 
(iii) 50% grid sharing charges including 
transmission line charges and 100% cost of land 
proportionate to load.  
Dedicated grid station and associated 
transmission line. OR 
DISCO may provide connection from its own grid 
station subject to availability of capacity! load in 
its grid and with mutual consent. In such case 
DISCO shall recover 100% grid sharing charges 
including transmission line charges and a piece of 
land i.e. minimum 12 Kanal for GIS and 20 Kanal 
for AIS at any suitable place. 
Above 2.5 MW 
to 
5 MW 
Above 5 MW 
to 
10MW 
Above 10MW 
to 20 MW 
Above 
20 MW 
Dedicated grid station and associated 
transmission line. 
15 
Multi-storey Buildings/ 
Commercial Plazas/I-ugh 
Rise Buildings 
4 Housing Society! Scheme 
upto 1 MW 
(i) Dedicated Distribution Transformer(s) 
(ii) Rehabilitation charges on actual basis (if 
any) in case connection is provided from 11 kV 
distribution feeder. 
(iii) 50% Grid sharing charges including 
transmission line charges proportionate to load 
without cost of land. 
Above 1 MW 
to 
2.5 MW 
(i) Dedicated Transformer(s) 
(ii) Rehabilitation charges on actual basis (if 
any) in case connection is provided from 11 kV 
distribution feeder. 
(iii) 50% Grid sharing charges including 
transmission line charges proportionate to load 
without cost of land. 
Above 2.5 MW 
to 
5 MW 
(i). Dedicated Transformer(s) 
(ii). Dedicated 11kV Feeder(s) 
(iii) 50% Grid sharing charges including 
transmission line charges proportionate to load 
without cost of land. 
Above 5 MW 
to 
10MW 
(i) Dedicated Transformer(s) 
(ii) Dedicated 1 1kV Feeder(s) 
(iii) 50% Grid Sharing charges including 
transmission line charges and 100% cost of land, 
proportionate to load. 
Above 10MW 
to 
20 MW 
Dedicated grid station and associated 
transmission line. OR 
DISCO may provide connection from its own grid 
station subject to availability of capacity! load in 
its grid and with mutual consent. In such case 
DISCO shall recover 100% grid sharing charges 
including transmission line charges and a piece of 
land i.e. minimum 12 Kanal for GIS and 20 Kanal 
for AIS within the housing scheme! society. 
Above 20 MW Dedicated Grid Station and associated 
transmission line. 
& APPROVED 
BY 
THE AUTHORITY 
16 
5 
One Point Supply!Bulk 
Supply under tariff 
category C' 
p ° 200 kW 
Dedicated Transformer OR 
transformer sharing charges proportionate to load 
subject to availability of capacity! load in the 
distribution transformer. 
Above 200 kW 
to 
2.5 MW 
(i) Dedicated Transformer(s) 
(ii) Rehabilitation charges on actual basis if any, 
in case connection is provided from 11 kV 
distribution feeder. 
Above 2.5 MW 
to 
5 MW 
(i) Dedicated Transformer (s) 
(ii) Dedicated 11kV Feeder (s) 
Above 5 MW 
Dedicated Grid Station and associated 
transmission line. 
The consumers maybe allowed extension of load 
beyond 5MW from the DISCO's owned grid 
station subject to availability of load in the grid 
and capacity in the 1 1kV existing dedicated 
feeder. In such a case the  consumer will bear 
100% grid sharing charges including transmission 
line charges and 100% cost of land proportionate 
to load. However, only such consumers be 
allowed extension of load beyond 5MW to 
7.5MW whose connection is at least three (3) 
years old. 
APPROVED \-< 
BY 
THE AUTHORITYR! 
17 
6 Industrial 
Up to 8 kW Common Distribution Transformer 
Above 8 kW 
to 
25 kW 
Dedicated Transformer OR 
transformer sharing charges proportionate to 
load subject to availability of capacity! load in 
the distribution transformer 
Above 25 kW 
to 
1 MW 
(i) Dedicated Transformer(s) 
(ii) Rehabilitation charges as given in below 
table if connection is provided from 11 kV 
distribution feeder. 
Above 1 MW 
to 
2.5 MW 
(i) Dedicated transformer(s) 
(ii) Dedicated 11 kV feeder OR Rehabilitation 
charges on actual basis (if any) in case 
connection is provided from 11 kV distribution 
feeder. 
Above 2.5 MW 
to 
5 MW 
(i) Dedicated Transformer(s) 
(ii) Dedicated 11 kV Feeder(s) 
Above 5 MW 
(i) Dedicated Transformer(s) 
(ii) Dedicated 11 kV Feeder(s) 
(iii) Dedicated Grid Station and associated 
transmission line. 
The consumers may be allowed extension of load 
beyond 5MW from the DISCO's owned grid 
station subject to availability of load in the grid 
and capacity in the 1 1kV existing dedicated 
feeder. In such a case the consumer will bear 
100% grid sharing charges including transmission 
line charges and 100% cost of land proportionate 
to load. However, only such consumers be 
allowed extension of load beyond 5MW to 
7.5MW whose connection is at least three (3) 
years old. 
p O1  \ 
I 
V 
18 
7 Steel Furnace 
Up to 5 MW 
(i) Dedicated Transformer(s) 
(ii) Dedicated 11 kV Feeder(s) 
Above 5 MW 
(i) Dedicated Transformer (s) 
(ii) Dedicated 11 kV Feeder(s) 
(iii) Dedicated Grid Station and associated 
transmission line. 
8 Agriculture 
Up to 8 kW Common distribution transformer 
Above 8 kW Dedicated distribution transformer 
9 'I'emporary supply 
p o 20 kW Common distribution transformer, if available, 
otherwise Dedicated distribution transformer. 
Above 20 kW 
Dedicated Distribution transformer from 
Common 11kV feeder if available otherwise 
dedicated 11 kV feeder. 
Note: 
i) DISCO (DISCO to insert its name) may grant connection to an applicant from the 
existing Dedicated Distribution System (DDS), provided that it is technically feasible 
and the prospective consumer has obtained no objection certificate from the owner of 
the DDS. 
In areas where Common Distribution System is not available, the connection will be 
granted on cost-deposit basis. If in future the system is converted into Common 
Distribution System by DISCO (DISCO to insert its name), the cost so incurred i.e. 
transformer, LT line etc except HT line shall be reimbursed to the owner as per Clause 
4-A of NEPRA (Consumer Eligibility Criteria), 2003 
If any applicant opts for installation of dedicated system instead of obtaining 
connection from a Common Distribution System, the same shall be provided on cost 
deposit basis. 
The sharing charges in respect of Grid station, 11 kV feeder, transformer are 
recoverable from the applicants proportionate to the load subject to availability of 
capacity/load and with mutual consent of both the parties. 
Grid sharing and Transmission Line charges for GIS @ Rs. 12.152 Million per MW 
Grid sharing and Transmission Line charges for AIS Rs. 8.948 Million per MW 
19 
xiv) Rehabilitation charges: 
Description Rate (Rupees per kW) 
15kWto40kW 250 
41 kWto 100kW 400 
101 kW to 500 kW 1200 
501 kW to 1000 kW 3000 
.'f APPROVED LU 
THE AUTHaRI1Y 
vii) In case of 1-lousing Society! Scheme! Colony! Multistorey Building! Commercial 
Plaza! Fligh Rise Building, having ultimate load demand up to 10 MW, the Grid 
Sharing Charges including transmission line charges and excluding cost of land will 
be as under: 
AIS. 50% Rs.4474!kW by the sponsor!applicant 
50% @ Rs.4474!kW by the DISCO 
50% @ Rs.6076!kW by the sponsor!applicant 
50% @ Rs.6076!kW by the DISCO 
viii) The cost of land will be recovered 100% @ Rs. 0.855 Million per MW proportionate 
to load. 
ix) In cases where ultimate load demand is above 10 MW, the Grid Sharing Charges 
including transmission line charges and excluding cost of land will be as under 
subject to availability of capacity!load in DISCO's grid station and with mutual 
consent of the parties: 
AIS 100% @ Rs.8948/kW by the sponsor/applicant 
100% Rs.12152!kW by the sponsor/applicant 
x) The minimum land for Gas Insulated Substation (GIS) will be 12 kanals and for Air 
insulated Substation (AIS) will be 20 Kanals. 
xi) In cases where dedicated grid station is required, DISCO (DISCO to insert its name) 
may allow two or more applicants to construct grid station on cost sharing basis. 
DISCO (DISCO to insert its name) may also provide connections above 10MW from 
its own grid station to the applicant as mentioned in the table subject to availability 
of load and in such case DISCO (DISCO to insert its name) shall recover 100% grid 
sharing charges including transmission line charges and obtain a piece of land (i.e. at 
least 12 kanal for GIS and 20 kanal for AIS) from the applicants. 
xii) In cases where transmission network! grid system of DISCO requires upgradation/ 
extension for provision of supply to a specific applicant! consumer, the same shall be 
carried out by DISCO on cost deposit basis / cost sharing basis. 
xiii) In case of Housing Society!Scheme!Colony/Multistorey Building! Commercial 
Plaza/high Rise Building once DISCO (DISCO to insert its name) takes over the 
distribution system for individual metering and billing, the responsibility of 
maintenance, repair, replacement of the said system or up gradation/reinforcement 
thereof shall rest with DISCO (DISCO to insert its name). 
20 
The rehabilitation charges are applicable in case of industrial category where connection 
is given from Common 11 kV feeder up to 1000 kW load. In other cases the rehabilitation 
charges shall be as per actual cost incurred (if any) for upgradation of system for 
provision of connection from Common Distribution System. 
2.7 INSTALLATION OF CONNECTIONS 
2.7.1 In cases where work is required to be carried out by DISCO and there is shortage 
of material or the material is not available due to any reason; DISCO may ask the 
sponsor / applicant to procure required material as per the specifications of 
DISCO (DISCO to insert its name) at its own from the approved vendors of 
DISCO (DISCO to insert its name). Material procured by the applicant shall be 
inspected/approved and installed by DISCO (DISCO to insert its name) and the 
applicant will be charged as under: 
(a) 2.5% of the total cost of material as inspection fee and 
(b) 8% of the material cost as installation charges. 
2.7.2 DISCO (DISCO to insert its name) shall provide option of execution of 
electrification work to the sponsor! applicant for I-lousing Scheme! Society! 
Colony! Commercial Plaza/High Rise building/Multistorey Building subject to 
the following conditions: 
(a) The sponsor/applicant shall submit electrification design to DISCO 
(DISCO to insert its name) for vetting. 
(b) Electrification work should be carried out through DISCO's (DISCO 
to insert its name) approved contractors as per the design and 
specifications of DISCO (DISCO to insert its name) 
(c) The material shall be procured from DISCO's (DISCO to insert its 
name) approved vendors and the same shall be as per the 
standards/specifications of DISCO (DISCO to insert its name). Proof 
to the effect that material has been procured from DISCO's (DISCO 
to insert its name) approved vendors be provided to DISCO (DISCO 
to insert its name), if so demanded. 
(d) The Sponsor/applicant will not purchase/use any material bearing any 
distribution company's monogram / color scheme / identification. 
(e) The sponsor/applicant will inform in writing to the concerned 
Manager (Operation)/Executive Engineer (Operation) about start of 
the work and a copy of the same shall be sent to the Chief Engineering 
(Planning) of DISCO (DISCO to insert its name). 
Jf APPRO,  
21 \EAUTHORITY 
for provision of connection in such cases must be observed. 
APPROVED 
BY 
22 \\
AUTHORITY  TE 
(f) In case any distribution company's material is found installed, DISCO 
(DISCO to insert its name) shall reserve the right to lodge FIR against 
the sponsor/applicant. 
(g) Electrification work should be carried out within the specified time 
period by the sponsor. (As per Annexure III). 
(h) The sponsor/applicant shall submit completion report to concerned 
Manager (Operation)/Executive Engineer (Operation) about 
completion of the electrification work and a copy of the same shall be 
sent to the Chief Engineering (Planning) of DISCO(DISCO to insert 
its name). 
(i) Sponsor is required to pay to DISCO (DISCO to insert its name) an 
amount equal to 25% (without taxes) of capital cost! connection 
charges estimate as security in the form of bank guarantee/pay-order; 
which shall be returned by DISCO (DISCO to insert its name) upon 
completion of electrification work of the scheme. 
(j) Following charges are recoverable from the sponsor/applicant 
(i) Electrification Design vetting fee: 1.5 % of cost of material 
(ii) Material inspection fee: 2.5 % of cost of material 
(iii) Supervision charges: 1.5 % of cost of material 
(k) In case sponsor intends to carry out underground electrification and 
relevant expertise are not available in the DISCO (DISCO to insert its 
name) for maintenance of such a system then the sponsor at his 
expenses will train the staff of the DISCO (DISCO to insert its name). 
DISCO may also enter into an agreement with the sponsor for 
maintenance of the system at mutually agreed terms. 
2.7.3 If the applicant opts for electrification of Housing Scheme / Society I Colony / 
Commercial PlazalHigh Rise Building/Multistorey Building through DISCO 
(DISCO to insert its name) then charges are recoverable from the applicant as 
per the detail provided in Clause 2.5 of this manual. 
2.7.4 If any Housing Scheme / Society / Colony / Commercial Plaza/High Rise 
BuildinglMultistorey Building is not electrified by the sponsor or there is no 
sponsor then the residents/ applicants may approach the concerned DISCO 
(DISCO to insert its name) in form of groups for electrification on cost deposit 
basis. Such areas may also be electrified by the concerned DISCO (DISCO to 
insert its name) at its own and cost so incurred shall be recovered from the 
- prospective consumers proportionate to their load. However, codal formalities 
2.8 MULTIPLE CONNECTIONS 
2.8.1 INDUSTRIAL CONNECTIONS 
DISCO (DISCO to insert its name) shall allow more than one industrial connection at 
the same premises subject to the following: 
(a) 1-laying different nature of industries. 
(b) 1-laying same tariff category. However, different tariff category 
connections may be allowed subject to satisfaction of DISCO (DISCO 
to insert its name) that no misuse of tariff will take place. 
(c) Having same source of supply i.e. 11 kV feeder. 
(d) In case the consolidated load of the premises approaches the threshold 
required for an independent II kV feeder, then connection will be 
provided through an independent feeder on cost deposit basis. The 
existing connection will also be supplied from the independent feeder. 
(e) Applicant having load above 8kW shall be provided through an 
independent transformer. If capacity is available in the existing 
dedicated distribution transformer; additional connection(s) will be 
provided from the same transformer at the same premises. In case the 
capacity is not enough; either an additional transformer will be 
installed or the capacity of the existing transformer will be enhanced 
on cost deposit basis. 
2.8.2 RESIDENTIAL CONNECTIONS 
(a) For a premises with separate portions, I)ISCO (DISCO to insert its name) 
shall allow more than one connection at the same premises subject to the 
following: 
i. Separate portions 
ii. separate electric circuits 
iii. separate kitchens 
iv. separate entrance / access 
v. An affidavit on non-judicial stamp paper worth Rs. 50/- submitted to 
the effect that separate family resides in separate portion of the 
premises 
'ftc above conditions are not applicable where the applicant requests for a 
separate connection under ToU tariff (5 kW and above) for the separate 
portion of the premises, provided that separate electric circuits exist. In such 
a case no request for reduction of load shall be entertained, in order to 
maintain applicability of ToU tariff. 
(b) 
(c) In both the above cases, DISCO (DISCO to insert its name) shall provide 
connections from the same transformer/feeder to avoid use of dual supply at 
the same premises. 
23 
2.9 SPACE FOR INSTALLATION OF TRANSFORMERS / METERING 
INSTALLATIONS / PANELS 
If DISCO (DISCO to insert its name) obtains space from the applicant for installation 
of Transformer/Metering installation/panels; the same space will be returned to the 
owner upon permanent disconnection of this facility if so demanded. However, if the 
transformer has been converted into Common Distribution System with the consent of 
the original owner and is being utilized by DISCO (DISCO to insert its name) for other 
consumers then the space provided by the applicant will remain with DISCO (DISCO 
to insert its name) even after permanent disconnection of the original applicant. 
2.10 CATEGORIES OF CONNECTION 
2.10.1 Applications for new connections are divided into following five categories: 
Connection 
Category Voltage Load Tariff Category Sanctioning 
Officer 
Category 1 23 0/400 V Up to 15 kW 
Al (Residential), 
A2(Commercial) & 
A3(General Services) 
SDO/AM(0) 
All other types of 
connections XEN/DM(0) 
Category 2 23 0/400 V Above 15 kW but not 
exceeding 70 kW 
All types of 
connections XEN/DM(0) 
Category 3 23 0/400 V Above 70 kW but not 
exceeding 500 kW 
All types of 
connections SE/Manager(0) 
Category4 llkVor33kV Above 500 kW but not 
exceeding 5000 kW 
All types of 
connections CEO 
Category 5 66kV and 
above All loads All types of 
connections CEO 
Note: The above mentioned sanctioning officers are also competent to process and sanction 
cases for change of name, extension of load, reduction of load, change of tariff as per procedure laid 
down below at clause 2.13 to 2.15 of this manual. 
2.10.2 Time period for various steps for processing new connections applications of 
different categories as mentioned above is given at Annex III: 
2.10.3 After scrutiny of the Application Form if DISCO (DISCO to insert its name) 
decides that connection cannot be provided to the applicant under the applicable 
documents/Criteria/Rules, it shall return the Application Form along with 
documents to the applicant clearly stating the reason for its inability to do so 
within the time period as required for the issuance of demand notice, as per 
Annexure III. 
24 
2.11 ASSESSMENT OF LOAI) 
2.11.1 Generally, the load declared in the Application Form by the applicant will be 
considered as the connected load, subject to provision of the test report issued by 
the Electric Inspector or his authorized wiring contractor and verification by 
DISCO (DISCO to insert its name). 
2.11.2 In case of I-lousing Schemes! Societies! Colonies! 1-ugh Rise Buildings! 
Commercial Plazas! Multistorey Buildings, where ultimate load is to be 
determined for carrying out electrification; the assessment of load will be as per 
the Annex VI. 1-Jowever, at the time of providing individual connections; the 
load declared in the Application Form by the applicant will be considered as the 
connected load, subject to provision of the test report issued by the Electric 
Inspector or his authorized wiring contractor and verified by DISCO (DISCO to 
insert its name) 
2.12 SIHFTING OF CONNECTIONS: 
2.12.1 Following type of connections are eligible for shifting within the DISCO (DISCO 
to insert its name): 
(a) General Supply (A1,A2) 
(b) General Services (A3) 
(c) Industrial 
(d) Agriculture 
2.12.2 The shifting of a connection may be processed subject to the following 
conditions: 
(a)  
(b)  
The new proposed site is within the DISCO (DISCO to insert its name). 
'l'he new proposed site is in the name of owner of the connection or in the 
name of his!her legal heir duly verified from land revenue record or acquired 
through legitimate lease agreement. 
In case, new site is in the name of legal heir, change of name of connection 
will also be processed. 
In case the material of the existing connection is not possible to shift at new 
site and is dismantled/utilized by the DISCO (DISCO to insert its name) then 
the adjustment/credit of the depreciated value of the said material shall be 
given in the cost estimate. 
The applicant shall make payment as under: 
i. Shifting and installation charges @ 10 % of actual cost of material 
(paid at the time of connection) to be shifted at new site. 
ii. Cost of extra/new material required for provision of connection at new 
site including 12% Store handling charges/Store issue rate 
iii. 8% of the new/extra material cost as installation charges. 
25 
(f) The applicant shall make payment of Security Deposit at prevailing rates 
subject to adjustment of already paid Security I)eposit. 
(g) The applicant shall make payment of outstanding dues. 
(Ii) The loading position! voltage drop/technical losses of the 11 kV feeder and 
loading of the transformer at new proposed site remains within permissible 
limits. 
(i) The new proposed site qualifies for connection and fulfills all the 
requirements of new connection. 
2.12.3 Documents to be attached for shifting of connection along with Application Form 
(Annex I) are as follows: 
(a) Ownership proof as per clause 2.3.1 of existing and proposed sites 
(b) Test report issued by the Electric Inspector or his authorized wiring contractor 
(c) Copy of last paid bill subject to the condition that no arrears! deferred 
amount/installments are pending. 
(d) Attested copy of CNIC 
2.12.4 Sanctioning officer for shifting of connections: 
The competent officer for shifting of connection will be the next higher officer if 
new site falls within his/her jurisdiction. In case the new site is located in another 
Circle, the competent officer will be CEO 
2.13 CIIANGE OF NAME 
2.13.1 Change of name will be required in the following cases: 
(a) Change of Property Ownership 
If the consumer sells the premises where the connection is installed, it shall be 
obligatory upon the new owner to apply to DISCO (DISCO to insert its name) for 
change of name. In such case the Security Deposit is required to be updated at 
prevailing rates subject to adjustment of already paid Security Deposit. 
(b) Death of owner/Through Succession 
Upon death of the consumer, if the legal heir(s) apply for change of name 
according to succession certificate granted by the court of competent jurisdiction, 
the change of name will take place. In such case the Security Deposit is required 
to be updated at prevailing rates subject to adjustment of already paid Security 
Deposit. 
Change of Company Ownership 
When a company is merged/amalgamated with or acquired by another company 
and change of name takes place then the Security Deposit is required to be 
pdated at prevailing rates subject to adjustment of already paid Security Deposit. 
26 
ER 
0 
ppPROVED ii BY 
+ HEAU  
NEP *  
2.13.2 Documents to be attached for change of name along with Application Form 
(Annex-I) 
(a) Ownership proof of the premises/sale deed. 
(b) Copy of last paid bill subject to the condition that no arrears! deferred 
amount/installments are pending. 
(c) Attested copy of CNIC of the applicant 
(d) Power Supply Contract 
(e) In case of Company, duly incorporated under the law the following additional 
documents shall be attached: 
(i) Certificate of incorporation; 
(ii) Resolution of Board of Directors authorizing a person to sign and 
execute the application and power supply contract; 
(iii) List of directors with complete addresses and copies of their 
computerized national identity cards. 
(iv) Court orders, in case of merger through a competent court of law. 
2.14 EXTENSION OF LOAD! REDUCTION OF LOAI) 
Documents to be attached for extension of load/reduction of load along with Application 
Form (Annex I): 
(i) Test report issued by the Electric Inspector or his authorized wiring 
contractor 
(ii) Copy of last paid bill subject to the condition that no arrears! deferred 
amount/installments are pending. 
(iii) Attested copy of CNIC 
(iv) Power Supply Contract 
(v) Payment of Capital Cost (if applicable) 
(vi) Updating of Security Deposit in case of extension/reduction of load at 
prevailing rates subject to adjustment of already paid security deposit. 
2.15 ChANGE OF TARIFF 
Documents to be attached for change of tariff along with Application Form (Annex I): 
(i) Test report issued by the Electric Inspector or his authorized 
contractor 
(ii) Copy of last paid bill subject to the condition that no arrears! deferred 
amount/installments arc pending. 
(iii) Attested copy of CNIC of the applicant 
(iv) Power Supply Contract 
(v) Payment of Capital Cost (if applicable) 
(vi) Payment of Security Deposit at prevailing rates subject to adjustment 
of already paid Security Deposit. \NERI?  C., 4/ 
APPROVED 
27 
  
 
* 
CHAPTER 3 
RELOCATION OF DISTRIBUTION FACILITY AND TEMPORARY 
CONNECTION 
3.1 RELOCATION OF 1)ISTRIBUTION FACILITY 
3.1.1 Due to Public Works 
If, for public improvement such as road construction, street widening, grading, 
excavating sidewalk spaces, or for other reasons DISCO (DISCO to insert its 
name) has to move distribution facilities from the existing position or new facility 
is to be provided for improvement of the system, the shifting/relocation/addition 
of the facility shall be carried out at the cost of the sponsoring agency. 
3.1.2 On Applicant's! Consumer's Request 
If an applicant! consumer requires the relocation of a distribution facility i.e. 
I-IT/Li' lines, transformers, structures, etc. for convenience, because of 
construction, or otherwise DISCO (DISCO to insert its name) shall, at the 
consumer's expense, relocate the distribution facility, if found feasible. In such 
case, the provision of right of way will be the resonsibility of the 
applicant/consumer. 
3.1.3 If any person constructs a house, shop or a building etc. near /under any existing 
distribution facility and subsequently applies for relocation of the same, it shall 
be relocated at the applicant's expense along with provision of right of way of by 
the applicant. 
3.1.4 DISCO (DISCO to insert its name) cannot construct any distribution facility over 
any house/building etc. without consent of the owner/consumer. If the DISCO 
(DISCO to insert its name) constructs distribution facility over any 
house/building etc. without the consent of the owner/consumer, the DISCO 
(DISCO to insert its name) shall relocate the facility at its own cost, on request of 
the owner/consumer. 
3.1.5 In the event of relocation, overhead system or any part thereof may be converted 
into underground system or vice versa, as the case may be in accordance with the 
ground situation. 
Note: 'T'he above provisions are also applicable for relocation of transmission facility. 
cj 4. 
j APPROVED 
BY 
AUTHORITY 
  
  
C 
 
   
   
   
28 
3.2 TEMPORARY CONNECTION 
3.2.1 An applicant may apply for a temporary connection for the following purposes: 
(a) Construction of houses 
(b) Construction of buildings! plazas 
(c) Illumination and lighting •for weddings, festival, functions, exhibitions, 
political gathering or national and religious ceremonies, etc. 
(d) Testing of industrial equipment 
(e) Any other emergent requirement of temporary nature 
3.3 PROCEDURE FOR TEMPORARY CONNECTION 
3.3.1 For Construction 
A temporary electric power supply connection for the construction shall be 
provided by DISCO (DISCO to insert its name) initially for a period of six months 
which is further extendable on three month basis up to completion of the specific 
job/project for which the temporary connection was obtained. 1-lowever, there is 
no minimum time period for provision of temporary connection. The sanctioning 
officer shall ensure that the temporary connection will be utilized for temporary 
purpose only. 
The applicant shall apply for a temporary connection on the Application Form 
prescribed for new connection (Annex — I), to the competent load sanctioning 
officer as per corresponding regular category of connection. 
(a) Documents to be attached with the application are as follows: 
(i) Ownership proof of the premises where temporary 
connection is required. 
If the applicant is a person other than the owner then the 
owner will affirm on a non-judicial stamp paper worth 
Rs.50/- as per schedule 1 of the Stamp Act 1899 to the 
effect that he/she has authorized the applicant to apply for 
the temporary connection. He/she would further affirm 
that he/she will be responsible for payment of dues against 
the premises where temporary connection is installed. 
(iii) Attested copies of CNIC of the applicant and a witness. In 
case of tenancy, attested copy of CNIC of the 
landlord/owner is also required. 
(iv) In case of I-lousing Schemes/Societies/Colonies/Fligh Rise 
Buildings/Commercial Plazas! Multistorey 
Buildings/industries evidence/proof that their case for 
29 
approval of layout plan/NOC is under process with the 
concerned civic agency. However, there is no such 
requirement for connections pertaining to individual 
houses. 
(b) The applicant shall be served with Demand Notice(s) for the capital 
cost! connection charges and Security Deposit*  which will be 
deposited with the designated bank. 
*s ecuj.jty deposit in this case is the cost of estimated consumption of 
electricity during the temporary connection period. The Security 
Deposit will be refunded at the time of discontinuation of temporary 
connection or will be adjusted if the temporary connection is 
converted into permanent/regular connection. However, the consumer 
shall continue to pay his/her regular bills as per the actual 
consumption recorded on the meter. 
(c) DISCO (DISCO to insert its name), after the receipt of necessary 
payment, shall provide the electric power connection as per priority 
maintained for temporary connections. 
3.3.2 Temporary Connection for IlluminationiI'esting/Any other Emergent 
requirement etc. 
A temporary electric power supply connection shall be provided by DISCO 
(DISCO to insert its name) for illumination and lighting for weddings, festivals, 
functions, exhibitions, or national and religious ceremonies etc., testing of 
industrial equipment or any other emergent requirement of temporary nature, for 
a specific time period not exceeding two weeks. The sanctioning officer shall 
ensure that the temporary connection will be utilized for temporary purpose only. 
The applicant shall apply for a temporary connection on the Application Form 
prescribed for new connection (Annex — I), to the competent load sanctioning 
officer along with copy of the CNIC and payment of capital cost! connection 
charges (if any) and Security Deposit. However, for any political 
gathering/function, NOC of the concerned Administration i.e. Deputy 
Commissioner, Assistant Commissioner etc., shall be mandatory. The Security 
deposit is the cost of estimated consumption of electricity during the temporary 
connection period. The Security Deposit will be refunded at the time of 
discontinuation of temporary connection or will be adjusted if the temporary 
connection is converted into permanent/regular connection. 
30 
3.4 PROCESS FOR EXTENSION! DISCONNECTION! CHANGE OF 
TEMPORARY CONNECTION INTO REGULAR CONNECTION 
3.4.1 DISCO (DISCO to insert its name) shall provide temporary electric connection 
to the applicant for a specified period and disconnect the same after the expiry of 
this period unless extended further on the request of the consumer and 
confirmation by DISCO (DISCO to insert its name) that the purpose for which 
temporary connection is required, still exists. 
3.4.2 The consumer of temporary connection shall apply for extension in the sanctioned 
period at least one week before the expiry of the sanctioned period. 
3.4.3 DISCO (DISCO to insert its name) shall disconnect the temporary connection 
without notice whenever it is no longer temporary in nature, or it is used for any 
other purpose. However, in cases where NOC or approval of Layout Plan 
(LoP)/map of the premises is under processes of approval with the concerned 
civic agency, DISCO (DISCO to insert its name) may continue the temporary 
connection for a period of six months. 
3.4.4 After the expiry of the sanctioned period or after the period when temporary 
connection is no more required and is disconnected, the material! equipment will 
be retained by DISCO (DISCO to insert its name) and the cost of equipment 
installed for temporary connection shall be reimbursed to the consumer at 
depreciated rates. However, in case a regular/permanent connection(s) is applied 
for the same premises and sanctioned thereof, the existing material along with 
metering installation for temporary connection will be utilized and temporary 
tariff will be changed to relevant applicable tariff after completion of codal 
formalities as per the procedure for new connection provided in Chapter 2 of this 
manual. 
3.4.5 If the applicant requests for shifting of material of temporary connection for any 
other premises either for another temporary connection or permanent connection; 
the 1)ISCO shall shift the material subject to following: 
) The new proposed site is within the DISCO (l)ISCO to insert its name). 
The new proposed site is in the name of owner of the connection or in the 
name of his/her legal heir duly verified from land revenue record or acquired 
through legitimate lease agreement. 
(c) 'ftc applicant shall make payment as under: 
i. Shifting and installation charges @ 10 % of actual cost of material 
(paid at the time of connection) to be shifted at new site. 
ii. Cost of extra/new material required for provision of connection at new 
site including 12% Store handling charges/Store issue rate 
31 
iii. 8% of the new/extra material cost as installation charges. 
(d) The applicant shall make payment of outstanding dues. 
(e) The loading position/ voltage drop/technical losses of the 11 kV feeder and 
loading of the transformer at new proposed site remains within permissible 
limits. 
±i' pppROVED 
Ui BY 
A1HEAUThORI  
32 
CHAPTER 4 
METERING INSTALLATION 
4.1 GENERAL 
This chapter covers metering installation on the premises of consumers of all categories 
receiving electric power from DISCO (DISCO to insert its name). 
DISCO (DISCO to insert its name) shall provide the appropriate metering installation at the 
cost of the consumer for all types of consumer categories. Flowever, in case of non-
availability of the same with DISCO (DISCO to insert its name), against new connection, 
extension/reduction of load or replacement of defective meter, the consumer may be asked 
to procure the metering installation according to the specifications as approved by DISCO 
(DISCO to insert its name) from the approved vendors of the DISCO (DISCO to insert its 
name); to avoid delay in provision of connectionl replacement of metering installation. No 
meter rent shall be charged if the cost of metering installation has been borne by the 
consumer. 
4.2 LOCK liON OF METERING INSTALLATION 
4.2.1 Metering installation of all categories of consumers shall be fixed at any 
convenient/proper place outside the premises of the consumer. It shall be the 
responsibility of the consumer to provide a safe and accessible location to DISCO 
(DISCO to insert its name) for setting up of the metering installation at his/her 
premises. In such cases, safe custody of the metering installation is the 
responsibility of the consumer. In case, DISCO (DISCO to insert its name) fixes 
the metering installation at its pole/structure then safe custody of the metering 
installation is the responsibility of DISCO (DISCO to insert its name). 
4.2.2 In case of theft of metering installation or damage due to any accident (in case 
meter is installed at the premises), the information must be communicated 
immediately by the consumer in written form to the concerned sub divisional 
office of DISCO (DISCO to insert its name) and I)lSCO (DISCO to insert its 
name) may take further legal action and lodge FIR. DISCO (DISCO to insert its 
name) shall immediately install another meter at site. In such case DISCO 
(DISCO to insert its name) may recover the cost of the meter by issuing a demand 
notice or through regular electricity bills. 
4.2.3 DISCO (DISCO to insert its name) shall make its best endeavor to install the 
meters in accordance with the latest industry standards and workmanship to 
ensure safety and security of the metering installation. 
4.2.4 The DISCO shall have the right at any time to change the place and position of 
the metering equipment to conform with the provision of the schedule of tariff 
enforce from time to time, Consumer Eligibility Criterai-2003, Grid Code and 
Distribution Code. However, the safe custody of metering installation is 
responsibility of DISCO if meter is shifted away from the premises. 
33 
4.2.5 The metering installation shall be fixed at a reasonable height from the ground 
level or at a level from where the meter reading/taking reading snapshot is 
possible without using climbing devices. 
4.2.6 For Multistorey buildings (two or more occupants) the metering installation of all 
the consumers shall be fixed at any appropriate location of the building. Each 
meter shall be labeled with the name and reference number of the consumer. 
4.2.7 DISCO (DISCO to insert its name) may install back-up meter on all industrial 
connections and other connections having sanctioned load of 50 kW and above 
on request of the consumer. The cost will be borne by the consumer if backup 
meter is installed on consumer's request. In case of any defect in the billing meter, 
the back-up meter will be converted into billing meter and the bills shall be 
charged on the basis of consumption recorded on the back-up meter. Upon 
replacement of the impugned meter, the same will be treated as back up meter. 
4.2.8 Should the consumer at any time requires the metering installation to be shifted 
to another place or position on the same premises, he/she shall apply to DISCO 
in person or online giving reasons thereof. Upon receipt of such request, a survey 
will be carried out within seven days for verification of alternative space. DISCO 
(DISCO to insert its name) after its satisfaction may shift the metering installation 
upon deposit of shifting charges (i.e. Rs. 500/- for single phase connection and 
Rs. 1000/- for three phase connection along with the extra material cost, if any) 
by the consumer as demanded through a demand notice by DISCO (DISCO to 
insert its name). 
4.3 METER REPLACEMENT AND BILL ADJUSTMENT: 
4.3.1 In case a metering installation becomes defective/burnt (which was otherwise 
correct up to last billing cycle), DISCO (DISCO to insert its name) shall: 
Replace the metering installation immediately or within two billing 
cycles if meters are not available. 
DISCO (DISCO to insert its name) may charge bills on average basis 
i.e. 100% of the consumption recorded in the same months of 
previous year or average of the last eleven months whichever is higher 
for a maximum period of two months. 
No previous charging shall be made against the consumer account if 
the meter was correct till the last billing cycle. 
   
ER R, 
  
(a)  
APPROVED 
4\THE AUTHORI 
9,  
   
   
(b)  C 
* 
        
         
(c)  
4.3.2 If the defectiveness of the meter is due to display wash then DISCO (DISCO to 
insert its name) shall: 
(a) Replace the metering installation immediately or within two billing 
cycles if meters are not available. 
34 
(b) DISCO (DISCO to insert its name) may charge bills on average basis 
i.e. 100% of the consumption recorded in the same months of previous 
year or average of the last eleven months whichever is higher for a 
maximum period of two months. 
(c) Data of the impugned meter shall be retrieved and actual consumption 
as per retrieved data shall be charged to the consumer after issuing a 
notice to the consumer and already charged bills issued on average 
basis shall be adjusted. 
(d) The consumer's account shall not be liable to any adjustment if the 
data is not retrieved within three months of display wash. However, if 
data retrieval is not possible within DISCO (DISCO to insert its name) 
and meter is sent to the manufacturer/company for data retrieval, and 
if its data is retrieved within six (6) months, then the consumer will be 
charged retrieved units after issuance of notice. In case, data is not 
retrieved within six (6) months the consumer's account shall not be 
liable to any adjustment. 
4.3.3 If at any time DISCO (DISCO to insert its name), doubts the accuracy of any 
metering installation, DISCO (DISCO to insert its name) may after informing the 
consumer: 
(a) Fix another duly calibrated and tested metering installation (check 
meter) in series with the impugned metering installation to determine 
the difference in consumption or maximum demand recorded by the 
check meter and that recorded by the impugned metering installation 
during a fixed period. 
Where it is not possible for DISCO (DiSCO to insert its name) to 
install check meter/metering installation of appropriate capacity (due 
to non-availability of such equipment or otherwise) in series with the 
impugned metering installation, to check the accuracy of the 
impugned metering installation, DISCO (DISCO to insert its name) 
shall, after informing (in writing) the consumer, test the accuracy of 
the impugned metering installation at site by means of Rotary Sub-
Standard or digital power analyzer or meter testing equipment. 
If the impugned metering installation should prove to be incorrect 
during the above checking(s), DISCO (DISCO to insert its name) shall 
install a "correct meter" immediately or within two billing cycles if 
meters are not available. 
(b)  
0 ER 
APPROV 
HAUTH7 
NEP9  (c)  
(i) In case slowness is established, DISCO (DISCO to insert its 
name) shall enhance multiplying factor for charging actual 
consumption till replacement of the defective metering 
installation. 
35 
0 ER 
ppPROVED 
BY 
UThOR 
NEP * 
(ii) Further, charging of a bill for the quantum of energy lost if 
any, because of malfunctioning of metering installation shall 
not be more than two previous billing cycles. 
(iii) In case fastness is established, DISCO (DISCO to insert its 
name) shall change/reduce multiplying factor for charging 
actual consumption till replacement of the defective metering 
installation. 'I'he DISCO (I)ISCO to insert its name) shall 
provide due credit for excessive units up to two previous 
billing cycles. 
4.3.4 Where a consumer is not satisfied with the accuracy of the metering installation, 
he/she may inform DISCO (DISCO to insert its name) for checking of the said 
metering installation. 
(a) Upon receiving such a request, DISCO (DISCO to insert its name) 
will issue a demand notice as meter challenge fee (i.e. Rs. 500/- for 
single phase and Rs. 1000/- for three phase connection for the 
checking of the said metering installation. 
(b) DISCO (DISCO to insert its name) will cheek the accuracy of the said 
metering installation in presence of the consumer/consumer's 
representative, within seven working days from the date of receipt of 
payment of such challenge fee. 
(c) DISCO (DISCO to insert its name) will install a duly calibrated check 
metering installation in series with the impugned metering installation 
or in the absence of a check metering installation, through a Rotary 
Sub Standard or digital power analyzer or meter testing equipment 
accompanied by an expert of DISCO's (DISCO to insert its name) 
metering and testing department. 
(d) If upon checking the metering installation, it is found to be fast and 
recording beyond the permissible limits, the meter shall be changed 
immediately on cost of DISCO (DISCO to insert its name) and due 
credit be given for excessive units up to two previous billing cycles. 
(e) If upon checking the metering installation, it is found to be slow! 
defective and not recording the actual consumption, the meter shall be 
changed immediately on cost of DISCO (DISCO to insert its name) 
and due slowness shall be charged to the consumer for two previous 
billing cycles. 
4.3.5 Where any consumer gives a notice in writing to DISCO (DISCO to insert its 
name) and informs of having requested the Electric Inspector! P01 to check the 
accuracy of the DISCO's (DISCO to insert its name) metering installation. 
36 
(a) In such a case, DISCO (DISCO to insert its name) shall not remove or 
take off the impugned metering installation from the consumer's 
premises until the Electric Inspector! P01 has conducted accuracy test 
of the impugned metering installation, in the presence of the 
consumer and/or their authorized representative and DISCO's 
(DISCO to insert its name), by means of a duly calibrated check meter 
installed in series with the impugned metering installation or through 
a Rotary Sub Standard or digital power analyzer or meter testing 
equipment and has given the result of the test. 
(b) Electric Inspector/POI shall carry out checking of the accuracy of the 
metering installation within one month of receipt of such request. 
(c) If the metering installation is found to be slow/fast, the metering 
installation shall be replaced immediately or within two billing cycles 
if meters are not available. 
(d) As a result of above checking, if percentage of slowness/fastness is 
specified then the debit/credit will be made for maximum two months 
as per the determined slowness/fastness. Further, the billing at the 
determined slowness/accounting for the fastness may continue till 
replacement of the metering installation. 
In case of defective meter, if DISCOs (DISCO to insert its name) charges bills on 
average basis/defective code and the consumer produces documentary evidence 
regarding non occupancy of the premises then only minimum charges are liable to 
be paid by the consumer. 
4.4 cosi FOR REPLACEMENT OF METERING INSTALLATION 
i'he cost of metering installation in case of replacement will be as under: 
Description Cost to be borne by 
Defective/damaged/burnt/display wash/internal 
fault/weathering effect etc. not due to consumer fault DISCO (DISCO to insert its name) 
Slowness owing to age/other reasons not related to 
illegal abstraction / stealing. Fastness due to any 
reason. 
DISCO (DISCO to insert its name) 
Meter defective! damaged! burnt/display wash due to 
Consumer's fault including overloading, internal 
wiring defect etc. 
Consumer 
Missing of metering equipment/damaged due to any 
accident 
- Consumer if installed at the premises. 
- DISCO (DISCO to insert its name) if 
installed at any other place i.e. pole, 
structure etc. 
ote: In case cost of metering installation is to be borne by the consumer, DISCO (DISCO 
to insert its name) may recover the cost through electricity bills to avoid delay in replacement 
of meter. 
37 
CHAPTER 5 
SECURITY DEPOSIT 
5.1 SECURITY DEPOSIT 
5.1.1 For all service connections, a demand notice for security deposit as per the rate 
approved by NEPRA shall be issued to the applicant for depositing the same in 
the designated bank branch. The Security Deposit rates are as per Annexure — IV. 
5.1.2 A period of thirty days for payment of Demand Notice is given. A grace period 
of thirty days may be allowed for payment of the demand notice on the request of 
the applicant. 
5.2 UPI)ATION OF SECURITY DEPOSIT 
5.2.1 In case of change of name due to any reason the Security Deposit shall be updated 
at prevailing rates subject to adjustment of already paid Security Deposit. 
5.2.2 In case of change of tariff category, shifting of connection and reconnection (if 
period of disconnection is more than 365 days), the Security Deposit shall be 
updated at prevailing rates subject to adjustment of already paid Security Deposit. 
5.2.3 In case of extension of load, the amount of security deposit shall be updated at 
prevailing rates for the entire load subject to adjustment of already paid Security 
Deposit. 
5.2.4 In case of reduction of load, the Security Deposit shall be updated at prevailing 
rates and the difference of the Security Deposit shall be refunded/charged, as the 
case may be. 
5.2.5 For the purpose of calculating the security deposit, the fraction of a kilowatt (for 
loads above one kilowatt) which is equal to or more than half kilowatt, shall be 
taken as one kilowatt, and the fraction which is less than half a kilowatt shall be 
ignored. 
The security deposit paid by the consumer shall be refunded at the time of 
permanent disconnection if applied by the consumer for refund after getting 
approval from the load sanctioning officer provided that there is no outstanding 
dues against the consumer. The process of refund shall be carried out within thirty 
(30) days of receipt of such request. 
5.3 BANK GUARANTEE 
5.3.1 The option of Bank Guarantee in lieu of security deposit shall be available to the 
industrial consumers under B-3 and B-4 as defined in Tariff terms and conditions 
categories only. The existing B3 and B-4 category consumers can also avail 
option of Bank Guarantee by withdrawing their previous security deposit from 
38 
DISCO (DISCO to insert its name) and submit a Bank Guarantee to the 
satisfaction of DISCO (DISCO to insert its name) on rate of security deposit for 
a validity period of three years. 
5.3.2 The Bank Guarantee is required to be renewed after every three years. The 
consumer is required to submit fresh Bank Guarantee within thirty (30) days of 
the expiry of the previous Bank Guarantee. In case of failure, DISCO (DISCO to 
insert its name) may disconnect the electricity supply after serving a clear seven 
days' notice to the consumer. 
5.4 SPECIAL ACCOUNT FOR SECURITY 1)EPOSIT 
1)ISCO (DISCO to insert its name) shall maintain a separate bank account for the security 
deposits in accordance with the provisions laid down under Section 217 of the Companies 
Act 2017. DISCO (DISCO to insert its name) shall not utilize this amount for any of its 
purposes. The profit so received from this security deposit account shall be mentioned in the 
tariff petition for passing on the benefit to the consumers. 
çNER R 
f APPROVED 
BY 
-'THE IITUlDITV S 
39 
CHAPTER 6 
METER READING AND BILLING 
6.1 
6.1.1 
6.1.2 
6.1.3 
ERRE 1(1 1.4 
ppROVE 
HE pUTHOR 
6.1.5 NEP 
METER READING 
Meter reading of all the consumers of DISCO (DISCO to insert its name) is carried 
out on a routine basis each month to record the consumption of energy consumed 
by each consumer during a given period (billing cycle/billing month). The meter 
reading is generally taken/recorded by the concerned staff of DISCO (DISCO to 
insert its name). For the purpose; the consumers of each sub division are divided 
into a number of batches and sub- batches. The meter reading program shall be 
prepared in such a way that the meters of a batch are normally read on the same 
dates each month. 
Meter readings of all types of connections are as under: 
I)esignation Load 
Meter Reader Up to 20 kW. 
Meter Reading Section Supervisor/LS Above 20 kW to 40 kW 
SDO/AM(0) Above 40 kW to less than 500 kW. 
XEN/DM(0) 500 kW and above. 
Taking snapshots of meter readings of all consumer categories is mandatory. Meter 
readings are taken through mobile snapshots/hand held units to ensure correct 
readings. The snapshots of meter reading including Net Metering facility wherever 
applicable showing import and export units are printed on electricity bill. DISCO 
(DISCO to insert its name) shall make available record of snapshots for twelve 
months for presenting before NEPRA, P01, Court of Law or any other competent 
forum if required for settlement of billing dispute, raised by any consumer. 
Meter Readers shall also check the irregularities/discrepancies in the metering 
system at the time of reading meters / taking snap shots and report the same in the 
reading book/discrepancy book or through any other appropriate method as per the 
practice. The concerned officer/official will take corrective action to rectify these 
discrepancies. 
If due to any force majeure it is not possible for DISCO (DISCO to insert its name) 
to take actual meter reading, the consumer may provide meter reading snap to 
DISCO (DISCO to insert its name) for carrying out actual billing or DISCO 
DISCO to insert its name) may issue a provisional bill on average basis i.e. 
consumption in corresponding month(s) of last year or average consumption of 
previous Eleven months whichever is lower. In such a case, bill along with a slab 
benefit will be issued as per actual meter reading upon normalization of the 
situation. 
40 
APPROVED 
BY 
THEA UTHaRjn' 
6.2 PERCENTAGE CHECKING 
In order to ensure recording of correct meter reading, the percentage check over the readings 
already recorded by the officials will be carried out as under: 
6.2.1 Line Superintendent Incharge: 
Line Superintendent Incharge will carry out the following checks over the 
readings recorded by the Meter Readers, over and above the discrepancies 
already noted by him from the readings supplied by the Meter Reader. 
Connection Type % Check 
General Supply/General services 5% 
Industrial up to 20 kW load 15% 
Agriculture Tube wells 15% 
lie will report to the SDO/AM (0) through the Meter Reading Section 
Supervisor the discrepancies in metering installation. 
6.2.2 Meter Reading Section Supervisor: 
Meter Reading Section Supervisor will exercise at least 15% check on 
Industrial and Agriculture Tube well Consumers having sanctioned load up 
to 20 kW and up to 20 number general supply/general service consumers per 
week, and report to the SDO/AM (0) any discrepancy noticed on the readings 
recorded by the Meter Reader(s) and Line Superintendent In-charge. 
6.2.3 SDO/AM (0) 
SDO/AM (0) will physically check at site readings of at least 2% of 
industrial, commercial and Agriculture Tube well connections with load up 
to 40 kW each month and at least 5 number other meters per day. Two meters 
to be checked should be those which the Meter Readers had read the previous 
day. I-Ic/she will initiate disciplinary action against the Meter Reader(s) who 
do not record correct meter reading as reported by LS Incharge/ Meter 
Reading Section Supervisor besides irregularities noticed by him. 
6.2.4 Executive Engineer/Deputy Manager (Operation) 
XEN/DM (0) will physically check at site at least 10% readings of meters of 
industrial, agricultural and commercial consumers having sanctioned load 
above 40 kW and up to 500 kW and at least 2 number other meters a day, one 
meter independently i.e. which has not been checked by the SDO/AM (0). 
?O\NER 
Qy__ . 
41 
6.2.5 Superintending Engineer/Manager (Operation) 
SE/Manager (0) will physically check at site at least 15% meter readings of 
consumers having sanctioned load over 500 kW and at least 5 number other 
meters as below: 
(a) One meter checked by the SDO/AM (0) 
(b) One meter checked by XEN/DM (0) 
(c) I'hree other meters 
6.2.6 The percentage check register should be maintained by Line Superintendent 
Incharge, Meter Reading Section Supervisor, SDO/AM (0), Executive 
Engineer/DM (0) and Superintending Engineer/Manager (0) for above checking: 
Note: However the primary responsibility for correct meter reading will rest on the 
officer/official who is responsible for monthly meter reading in routine. 
6.3 METER READING OF AMR 
A separate batch has been created for the connections where AMR system are installed. 
l3illing of such consumers is carried out as per schedule made by DISCO (DISCO to insert 
its name) remotely. 
6.4 ELECTRICITY BILL 
6.4.1 Electricity bill shall generally contain the following information: 
.f I APPROVED 
WI BY 
XTHE AUTHORITY 
INFORMATION DESCRIPTION 
Billing Month The month for which bill is being issued. * 
Name and Address The name and address of the consumer. 
Reference No. A dedicated number allotted to a consumer for identification. 
Tariff 'I'he applicable rates and charges approved by NEPRA for the category of 
connection. 
Load The load sanctioned for the connection. 
Meter No, Billing meter, Net Metering 
Date of connection The date on which the meter was installed 
Reading Date The date on which the meter reading is taken. 
Issue Date 'I'he date on which bill is issued to the consumer. 
Due Date The date by which amount of the bill is to be paid. However, if the due date 
falls on a holiday, the due date shall be the next working day. 
Present meter reading The meter reading taken on the reading date 
Previous meter reading The meter reading taken on the previous month reading date 
Exported/ Imported 
Units In case of Net Metering 
Snap shots 
-/ 
The snap shot of present meter reading, peak/off peak including exported 
meter reading in case of net metering facility. In case of MCO, the snapshot 
of final reading of the previous meter shall also be printed. 
Total units Coispm / The units consumed during a Billing Period or average consumption in case 
of defective meter. 
42 
• Billing History Details of billing by DISCO (DISCO to insert its name) and payment by the 
consumer for the period of 12 months. 
lotal cost of Electricity The cost as per applicable tariff of total units consumed or average 
consumption in case of defective meter. 
Installments Any amount to bepaid as per installments allowed by the Competent Officer. 
GST The General Sales Tax levied by the Government of Pakistan 
Amount Payable within 
due date 
Total current amount of all the payment items as mentioned in the bill 
including arrears amount, if any 
Deferred Amount Amount deferred by DISCO (DISCO to insert its name) 
Arrears Unpaid amount of the bill. 
Late Payment 
Surcharge (LPS) The amount levied on account of non-payment of bill within due date 
Amount Payable after 
due date 
Total of amount payable within due date including 
Late Payment Surcharge. 
Fixed Charges As defined in Tariff Terms & Conditions. 
Variable Charges As defined in Tariff Terms & Conditions. 
Billing Demand As defined in Tariff Terms & Conditions. 
ED Electricity Duty levied by the Provincial Government. 
Other Charges 
Fuel Price Adjustment(FPA), Quarterly tariff adjustment (QTA), Financing 
Cost (FC) surcharge , Annual Distribution Margin Component (ADMC) ,PTV -. 1ee, Withholding Tax, any other charge/surcharge levied by the Federal 
Government etc. 
Payment of Bills I3anks and other Financial Institutions where the bills can be paid. 
Other particulars Name and address of consumer, name of division/sub-division/feeder, contact 
number for Complaint, Contact number of XEN/SDO 
Add ress Addresses of concerned sub-division, NEIRA head office /regional office, 
Electric Inspector/Provisional office of Inspection 
Note: DISCO (DISCO to insert its name) shall not print any instruction on the bill in violation 
of the Act, Rules, Regulation, Codes and any other applicable document. 
All the above mentioned information shall also be printed in Urdu on the bill. 
In cases where accumulated readings are recorded, segregated bills shall be 
prepared keeping in view the number of months for which the readings have 
accumulated to give slab benefit/relief to the consumers. 
3 The consumers are advised to read the "INSTRUCTIONS FOR THE PAYMEN'I' 
OF BILLS" given on the Monthly Electricity bills for their knowledge and 
guidance. 
6.5 TIME PERIOD FOR PAYMENT OF BILLS 
The due date for payment of bills shall be within fifteen (15) days from the issue date 
of the bills. However, the consumers will have clear seven (7) days from the date of 
actual delivery of the bill for the purpose of payment. DISCO (DISCO to insert its 
name) may develop alternative method for distribution /dispatch of electricity bill 
electronically (i.e. through e-mail, WhatsApp etc.) 
43 
6.6 PROCEI)URE FOR BILLS DISTRIBUTION 
6.6.1 The Bill Distributor shall deliver the bills at the premises of the consumers within 
a day of receipt of the bill for distribution 
6.6.2 Electricity bill shall be available on DISCO's (DISCO to insert its name) website 
for downloading & payment 
6.6.3 AM (0), DM (0) and SE (Operation) shall ensure delivery of bills within 
stipulated time. 
6.7 COLLECTION /PAYMENT OF ELECTRICITY BILLS 
6.7.1 All Commercial Bank Branches and Post Offices of the respective City/District 
where connection exists shall be collecting electricity bills from consumers who 
have been given option to deposit their electricity bills in any designated bank 
branch/post office. Online payment and payment through ATM Card/Credit 
Cards or through cross cheques at designated bank branches can also be made 
where possible. NADRA KIOSK are also authorized to collect electricity bills. 
6.7.2 In order to avoid Late Payment Surcharge (LPS), consumers shall pay their bills 
within due date. Consumers can also make payments in Revenue Offices through 
crossed cheques! pay orders/ bank drafts. However, in order to avoid late payment 
surcharge, the cheque/bank draftipay order, be deposited to the Revenue Office 
and the bank branch at least three days prior to due date so as to ensure realization 
within due date. 
6.8 EXTENSION OF DUE DATE FOR PAYMEN'I' AND INSTALLMENTS OF 
ELECTRICITY BILLS: 
Competent Officer Extension of due date for 
payment of bills Installments of Bills 
SDO/AM(0) 
RO/AM(CS) 
maximum 03 days for bills 
up to Rs. 50,000/- 
03 monthly installments for amount 
of bill up to Rs. 50,000/- 
XEN/DM(0) maximum 03 days for bills 
up to Rs. 200,000/- 
03 monthly installments for amount 
of bill up to Rs. 200,000/- 
SE/Manager (0) maximum 05 days for bills 
up to Rs. 500,000/- 
04 monthly installments for amount 
of bill up to Rs. 500,000/- 
Director 
Commercial 
maximum 05 days for bills 
up to Rs. 1000,000/- 
05 monthly installments for amount 
of bill up to Rs. 1000,000/- 
CSD maximum 08 days for bills up to 
Rs. 20 Million 
12 monthly installments for amount 
of bill up to Rs. 20 Million!- 
CEO maximum 10 days for all amount full powers for all amount 
Note: Late Payment Surcharge (LPS) will not be imposed where due date is extended. 
     
   
NER R 
  
C.  ' 
  
  
APPROVED < 
BY 
EAUTHO•RITY 
  
  
  
  
  
44 
 
  
APPROVED \ 
BY 
THE AUTHORITY,! 
CHAPTER 7 
TARIFF 
7.1 TARIFF' 
Tariff means the rates, charges, terms and conditions for generation of electric power, 
transmission, interconnection, distribution services and sales of electric power to consumers 
by DISCO (DISCO to insert its name). DISCO (DISCO to insert its name) shall charge only 
such tariff from consumers as is approved by NEPRA and duly notified by Government of 
Pakistan from time to time. 
7.2 AVAILABILITY OF SCHEDULE OF TARIFF 
'l'he schedule of tariff as approved by NEPRA and notified by the Government of Pakistan, 
shall be made available in DISCO (DISCO to insert its name) offices and shall be provided 
to the consumers on demand free of cost. The schedule of tariff will also be made available 
by DISCO (DISCO to insert its name) at its website. All consumer queries/clarifications in 
respect of applicable tariff shall be adequately addressed by DISCO (DISCO to insert its 
name). 
7.3 1'OWER FACTOR PENALTIES 
The penalties for low power factor shall be levied according to the "Terms and Conditions" 
of approved tariff of respective category. 
7.4 CHANGE OF TARIFF 
7.4.1 The following consumer categories are eligible to apply to DISCO (DISCO to 
insert its name) for change of tariff: 
(a) Consumers of General Supply i.e. (Residential (Al), Commercial (A2), 
General Services (A3) are eligible to apply for change of tariff from one 
category to another. For example: 
i) AltoA2orA3 
ii) A2 to Al orA3 
iii) A3 to Al or A2 
(b) Commercial Category into Industrial Category (B 1 & B2 only) and vice-
versa 
(c) Seasonal industrial connection to non-seasonal and vice-versa. 
(d) Tube well to industrial, however, industrial connection cannot be 
converted into tube well connection till completion of one year period, 
from date of energization and fulfillment of other formalities. 
45 
7.4.2 Terms and conditions for change of tariff: 
(a) Change of tariff will be allowed by the connection sanctioning officer. 
(b) Change of tariff will be allowed if no dues are outstanding. 
(c) The consumer shall make payment of Security Deposit at prevailing rates 
subject to adjustment of already paid Security l)eposit 
(d) New contract on prescribed form (Annex — II) is to be executed between 
the consumer and DISCO (DISCO to insert its name) 
7.4.3 The consumer shall apply, at least 30 days in advance, for the change of his 
existing tariff to the competent load sanctioning officer. 
7.4.4 The consumer shall submit the application for change of tariff along with the 
required documents as mentioned in the application form (Annex — I). 
7.4.5 DISCO (DISCO to insert its name) shall process the case and accord approval for 
change of tariff within thirty (30) days of receipt of application. 
7.5 MIS-USE OF TARIFF 
7.5.1 The consumer shall, in no case use the connection for the purpose other than for 
which it was originally sanctioned. In case of violation, the consumer is liable for 
disconnection and legal action. 
Explanation: 
The phrase for the purpose other than for which the connection was originally 
sanctioned means if a connection was originally sanctioned under one tariff 
category for example domestic tariff (A-I) and is being used for commercial 
purpose i.e. A-2. 
DISCO (DISCO to insert its name) shall serve seven days clear notice to the 
consumer who is found misusing his/her sanctioned tariff. Flowever, DISCO 
(DISCO to insert its name) shall immediately change the tariff and shall 
determine the difference of charges of the previous period of misuse to be 
recovered from consumer. However in the absence of any documentary proof, the 
maximum period of such charges shall not be more than two billing cycles. 
If any consumer uses higher MDI i.e. B-1 consumer uses load above 25 kW, the 
DISCO (DISCO to insert its name) shall immediately issue notice for change of 
tariff to B-2, however, charging of difference of tariff or power factor penalty 
shall not be more than six (6) months, retrospectively. Similarly, if a consumer 
having load less than 5 kW uses higher load; the DISCO (DISCO to insert its 
name) shall issue notice for extension of load and shall extend the load after 
completion of codal formalities and in such case fixed charges/power factor 
penalty wherever applicable shall not be raised •for more than six (6) months, 
retrospectively. Flowever, these charges may be raised within one year and after 
one year no claim shall be legal. 
46 
7.5.1 If the Authority modifies the terms and conditions of tariff at anytime, the DISCO 
(DISCO to insert its name) shall immediately change the tariff accordingly 
however, charging of difference of tariff shall not be more than six (6) months, 
retrospectively. Further, these charges may be raised within one year of such 
notification and after one year no claim shall be legal. 
7.6 APPLICATION OF WRONG TARIFF 
Application of a correct tariff is the responsibility of DISCO (DISCO to insert its name) at 
the time of sanction of connection. In case of application of wrong tariff, which is lower than 
the applicable tariff, no differential bill will be debited against the consumer account. 
1-lowever, in case where higher tariff has been charged to the consumer than adjustment! 
credit for six (6) months be allowed retrospectively, from the date of pointing out of such 
discrepancy. 
tf APPROVED 
* 
p 
47 
8.2.4 
CHAPTER 8 
DISCONNECTION AND RECONNECTION 
8.1 1)ISCONNECTION 
A premises is liable to be disconnected on the following grounds: 
i. Consumer is a defaulter in making payments of the electricity bill(s); 
ii. Consumer is involved in theft of electricity; 
iii. Consumer illegally reconnects his electricity connection; 
iv. Consumer has extended his load beyond the sanctioned load. 
v. Consumer has made a request for disconnection. 
vi. Consumer is involved in misuse of tariff or using electricity for purpose other 
than for which the connection was sanctioned, as explained at Clause 7.5.1. 
vii. Consumer has not submitted fresh bank guarantee within 30 days of expiry of 
the previous bank guarantee. 
8.2 I)ISCONNEC'I ION PROCEDURE 
8.2.1 The consumer is bound to pay the electricity bill within due date as specified in 
the bill or with the late payment surcharge if paid after due date. The connection 
shall not be disconnected if any consumer fails to deposit the current month bill 
provided that there are no outstanding dues. 
8.2.2 No connection must be disconnected on In case of non-payment of the previous 
month bill, DISCO (DISCO to insert its name) shall issue notice of clear seven 
days along with the second month bill to the defaulting consumer to either clear 
the outstanding dues with the second month bill or face disconnection. The notice 
may also be printedlstamped on the electricity bill. 
8.2.3 No connection shall be disconnected on default of one month bill. 
In case of non-receipt of payment and upon expiry of the due date given on the 
second month bill, the supply of the defaulting premises shall be disconnected. In 
such cases the disconnected supply shall not be reconnected or restored by 
DISCO (DISCO to insert its name) until full payment along with late payment 
surcharge or payment in installments (allowed by the DISCO) has been made by 
the consumer. 
If the consumer fails to pay the bills of third month along with arrears of previous 
two months within due date given on the third month bill, DISCO (DISCO to 
insert its name) shall issue Equipment Removal Order (ERO) and remove the 
metering installation! material and shall allot permanently disconnected code. The 
electric supply will only be restored upon payment of all outstanding dues (in full 
or installments) and completion of other codal formalities given in reconnection 
policy. I-Iowever, if a DISCO (DISCO to insert its name) does not remove the 
equipment for its own ease, the consumer shall not be held responsible for theft 
of electricity or material, if any. 
48 
8.2.6 Power supply of the consumers who are allowed by DISCO (DISCO to insert its 
name) to make the payment in installments shall not be disconnected provided 
the consumer is making payment of the installments. However, if a consumer 
further defaults in making payment of installments, the power supply of such a 
consumer shall be disconnected without any further notice and shall only be 
restored after receipt of minimum 50% dues. 
8.2.7 A premises where more than one connection exists in different names in different 
portions, and any of the consumer defaults in making payments, the other 
connections shall not be disconnected. Flowever, the DISCO (DISCO to insert its 
name) shall strictly keep the premises under observation that the defaulted portion 
shall not take supply from any other connection. 
8.2.8 If more than one connection exists in the name of single owner and any of the 
connections defaults, and the DISCO (DISCO to insert its name) allots permanent 
disconnection code as per procedure, in such a case the DISCO may transfer the 
outstanding dues of the defaulting connection to the other running connection(s) 
of the same owner for recovery purposes. 
8.2.9 Power supply of a defaulting consumer shall not be disconnected who has lodged 
a complaint/petition against any wrong billing or any dispute relating to the 
payment of electricity bill with NEPRA wherein restraining orders have been 
issued. However, the consumer will continue to pay current bills regularly. 
8.2.10 If a consumer extends the existing load beyond the sanctioned load, a notice shall 
be issued to the consumer to apply for extension of load. The consumer shall 
apply for extension of load within fifteen days of the receipt of the notice. DISCO 
(DISCO to insert its name) shall disconnect the power supply if the consumer 
fails to apply for extension of load and completes other formalities. 
If a consumer having independent 11 kV feeder becomes defaulter, the DISCO 
(DISCO to insert its name) shall allot permanent disconnection code and shall 
wait for the consumer for one (1) year for reconnection. If the consumer does not 
come forward for reconnection within one (1) year, the DISCO (DISCO to insert 
its name) shall issue notice to the consumer and wait for one month for the reply 
of the consumer. If the reply of the consumer is not received/ or the reply is 
unsatisfactory; the DISCO may utilize the feeder for provision of supply to other 
consumers after lapse of notice period. In such case, the DISCO shall work out 
the depreciated value of the 11kV feeder and adjust outstanding dues. The 
remaining amount, if any shall be reimbursed to the consumer after completion 
of coda! formalities. 
8.3 TEMPORARY 1)IscoNNEC'rloN ON CONSUMER'S REQUEST. 
In case a consumer shifts to some other location or intends to get disconnected the supply 
due to any reason, the temporary disconnection of supply may be allowed on consumer 
request, for a maximum period of eleven months subject to the following:- 
49 
For General Supply Tariff-(A- 1,A-
2) & General services (A-3) 
(single phase only) 
Minimum/fixed charges of Rs. 200 only for any period. 
For General Supply 
Tariff A-i A-2 & General Services 
A-3 (3-Phase Connections) 
For Industrial Supply 
Tariff (B-i, B-2, B-3, B-4, B-5) 
For Agriculture tube well and lift 
irriationjumps 
Minimum/fixed charges for actual period of disconnection of 
supply if period of disconnection is up to ninety days. 
In case the period of disconnection of supply is more than ninety 
days and up to three years, then the minimum/fixed charges will 
be recovered @ one month for every quarter in addition to the 
minimum/fixed charges for ninety days. Period less than a quarter 
8.3.1 That the consumer has paid the final bill up to the day immediately preceding the 
intended date of request for temporary disconnection. 
8.3.2 That exemption in payment of minimum/fixed charges will be admissible for the 
actual period of disconnection. 
8.3.3 That no reconnection fees shall be charged if the consumer applies for 
reconnection within seven days after the expiry of disconnection period. 
8.3.4 After the expiry of the period allowed for disconnection, the minimum/fixed 
charges will be applicable even if the consumer does not apply for reconnection 
and does not use electricity. In case the consumer defaults in payment of the future 
bills, the connection may be disconnected and equipment installed at the premises 
may be removed after service of notice as per disconnection procedure. 
Restoration of supply to such a premises shall also be governed as per the 
Reconnection Policy and payment of minimum! fixed charges will be admissible 
for entire period of disconnection. 
PERMANENT 1)ISCONNECTION ON CONSUMER'S REQUEST. 
A consumer who intends to get the premises disconnected permanently shall apply to the 
concerned load sanctioning officer, who will arrange the final electricity bill from the 
Revenue Officer/AM (CS). After payment of final electricity bill, the load sanctioning officer 
will issue permanent disconnection order. Disconnection for consumers supply shall be 
effected through ERO to avoid misuse of electricity after permanent disconnection. The 
permanently disconnected consumer will not be responsible for misuse of electric supply 
from the facility if not removed by DISCO (DISCO to insert its name) after permanent 
disconnection. 
8.5 RECONNECtiON POLICY 
'i'he disconnected premises shall be reconnected by DISCO (DISCO to insert its name) on 
the application of the consumer maximum up to ten (10) years subject to the following: 
.5.1 Clearance of all outstanding dues/partial payment as allowed by the DISCO 
(DISCO to insert its name). 
8.5.2 Payment of fixed/minimum charges: 
50 
will be ignored for the purpose of recovery of minimum//fixed 
charges). 
If the period of disconnection is more than three years from the 
date of disconnection, minimum/fixed charges for the 
disconnected period beyond three years from the date of 
disconnection up to the date of reconnection shall be recovered in 
addition to the charges laid down in (a) and (b) above. 
The minimum/fixed charges for period beyond three (03) years 
and up to ten (10) years shall be @ one month for every year. 
Period less than a year shall be ignored in calculations. 
or Bulk Supply 
ariff(C-1, C-2, C-3) 
or Public Lighting 
ariff-G 
NIL 
NIL 
or ONE Point supply to Residential 
olonics attached to the premises of 
ndustrial supply consumers, who have 
heir own distribution facility. 
ariff-H 
NIL 
8.5.3 Payment of Reconnection Fee. 
Description Reconnection Fee 
(Rs.) 
Arrears up to Rs. 5000/- 500/- 
Arrears between Rs. 5,001/- and Rs. 20000/- 800/- 
Arrears between Rs. 20001/- and Rs. 1 Lac 2,000/- 
Arrears between Rs. I Lac to Rs. 10 Lac 4,000/- 
Arrears over Rs. 10 Lac 10,000/- 
Disconnection of electricity supply due to 
dishonest abstraction of electricity 2 000/.. 
Seasonal Consumer Nil 
8.5.4 Cost of material to be recovered at the time of reconnection. 
(a) The material which is removed from the site as a result of disconnection 
/ shall be kept in the sub division for 365 days from the date of 
disconnection and an entry to this effect shall be made in the register kept 
for this purpose. However, no cost of material shall be charged to the 
consumer if the consumer applies for reconnection within 365 days of 
disconnection. 
51 
(b) If a disconnected consumer does not come •forward •for reconnection 
within 365 days of disconnection, then the removed material shall be 
returned to the store and taken on stock. 
(c) In case a disconnected consumer applies for reconnection after the expiry 
of 365 days but within three years of disconnection, credit on depreciated 
value of the removed material shall be given in the cost estimate of 
material, provided that the cost of the removed material was originally 
paid by the consumer. 
(d) In case a disconnected consumer applies for reconnection after a period 
of three years of disconnection, no credit of the cost of the removed 
material shall be given, even if the consumer had originally paid the entire 
cost of the material. 
(e) In case of reconnection of a disconnected premises where no arrears are 
outstanding against the premises and due to some reason serviceable 
material is available at site, DISCO (DISCO to insert its name) may utilize 
such material and cost of such material will not be recovered from the 
consumer subject to the satisfaction of DISCO (DISCO to insert its name) 
that the material is genuine, and operationally safe. The material may be 
tested by DISCO (DISCO to insert its name) for its satisfaction and cost 
in this regard will be borne by the consumer. 
(I) DISCO (DISCO to insert its name) may issue cost estimate for installation 
of reclaimed transformer for reconnection on request of the applicant, if 
available with DISCO (DISCO to insert its name). 
8.5.5 If the electricity connection is disconnected on account of severe fault/fire in the 
internal wiring of the premises; provision of fresh wiring test report of the Electric 
Inspector or his authorized contractor will be mandatory prior to the reconnection. 
However, DISCO may reconnect electricity supply on temporary basis till 
issuance of test report after physical verification of wiring and its satisfaction. 
8.6 SECURITY DEPOSIT FOR RECONNECTION 
In case of reconnection, the consumer shall be charged security deposit as under: 
8.6.1 For consumers whose security deposit has not been adjusted against the 
outstanding arrears and the disconnection period is less than 365 days, no 
additional security deposit will be charged. 
8.6.2 For consumers whose security deposit has been adjusted against the arrears and 
their disconnected period is within 365 days only the amount of adjusted security 
deposit shall be charged. 
8. . For consumers whose security deposit has not been adjusted against arrears but 
their disconnected period is more than 365 days, the difference in amount between 
the security deposit already paid and the security deposit payable at prevailing 
rates at the time of reconnection, shall be charged. 
52 
8.6.4 For consumers whose security deposit has been adjusted against the arrears and 
their disconnected period is also more than 365 days, the security deposit at the 
prevailing rates shall be charged. 
8.7 OPTION OF NEW CONNETION INSTEAD OF RECONNECTION 
8.7.1 The disconnected consumers, having disconnected period of more than three 
years and up to ten (10) years may opt for a new connection in the same premises 
subject to clearance of all dues outstanding against previously disconnected 
connection. In case of new connection, nothing on account of fixed 
charges/minimum charges/reconnection fee for the disconnected period shall be 
charged. However, the security deposit of the previous connection may be 
adjusted against the new connection if not accounted for earlier. 
8.7.2 The consumers having disconnection period of more than ten (10) years are not 
eligible for reconnection and are required to apply for a new connection at the 
same premises. 1-lowever, such applicants shall be given priority for provision of 
connection. 
8.7.3 For provision of new connection as given above, if the material of the 
disconnected connection was not removed and still exists on site, DISCO (DISCO 
to insert its name) may utilize such material for the new connection if the same is 
serviceable and cost of such material will not be recovered from the consumer. 
Testing charges for such material are payable shall be borne by the consumer. 
However, cost of additional material, if required will be deposited by the 
consumer. 
8.8 DISCONNECTION DECLARED NULL AND VOID BY COMPETENT 
FORUM 
If a connection is disconnected by DISCO (DISCO to insert its name) and subsequently such 
action is declared as null and void by NEPRA/POI/Court of Law! any other competent forum, 
no fee/charges on account of reconnection fees/fixed charges/ minimum charges / security 
deposit! cost of material is chargeable to the consumer. 
8.9 RECOVERY OF DUES 
In case consumers fail to pay the arrears amount, all legal measures/actions shall be initiated 
against such consumers for recovery of outstanding dues. DISCOs may announce 
packages/schemes from time to time for recovery of dues from the defaulters, subject to 
approval of BoD. 
53 
CHAPTER 9 
DISHONEST ABSTRACTION, CONSUMPTION OR USE OF ENERGY 
9.1 THEFT OF ELECTRICITY/ENERGY 
9.1.1 DIRECT THEFT OF ELECTRICITY BY REGISTERED! UN REGISTERED 
CONSUMERS OF DISCO (DISCO to insert its name). 
If a premises/person is found to be hooked directly with DISCO's (DISCO to 
insert its name) supply line by bypassing the metering installation or the metering 
installation is missing at site (where the safe custody of the meter is the 
responsibility of the consumer) , or supply is restored illegally on disconnected 
premises, or if the consumer is using electricity direct from DISCO's (DISCO to 
insert its name) supply line and/or the person living in the premises is not a 
consumer of DISCO (DISCO to insert its name), or meter is installed at site but 
no record exists then DISCO (DISCO to insert its name) shall inter-alia process 
the case as theft of electricity. Information of such offense is provided to the 
police in writing by the concerned officer (not below Grade 17) of DISCO 
(DISCO to insert its name) or by an officer of an equivalent grade. 
9.1.2 All theft cases as mentioned above would be dealt by DISCO (DISCO to insert 
its name) strictly in accordance with relevant sections of Pakistan Penal Code, 
1860 (Act XLV of 1860) and the Code of Criminal Procedure, 1898 (Act V of 
1898). The disconnection of electricity shall be carried out immediately under the 
supervision of concerned Officer of DISCO (DISCO to insert its name) by 
removing such facility. The removed material shall be preserved as a proof of 
theft i.e. the case property and the same shall be produced before the court during 
the trial. After conclusion of the legal proceedings the material so removed shall 
be retained by DISCO (DISCO to insert its name). 
9.1.3 DISCO (DISCO to insert its name) shall be authorized to recover its loss by 
raising a detection bill as follows provided that the maximum period of charging 
in such cases shall be restricted to twelve months for unregistered consumers and 
up to six months for registered consumers: 
a. Detection Bill for Unregistered Consumers 
No of detection units = Load x Load Factor x 730 x Months 
Where: 
• Load means the connected load or running load in kW 
whichever is higher 
• Months = Period for charging detection bill 
• Load Factor as per Annexure-V 
• 730 Average number of hours in a month cNER i 
I APPROVED 
BY 
4 THE AUTHORITY/ 
54 iVcpRP. 
b. Detection Bill for Registered Consumers 
The detection bill shall be issued as per the following methods in the order 
of priority: 
(i) Previous consumption/Billing History 
(ii) On the basis of future undisputed consumption if no previous 
credible consumption is available. 
(iii) No of detection units = Load x Load Factor x 730 x Months 
Where: 
. 
S 
S 
Load means the connected load or sanctioned load in kW 
whichever is higher 
Months = Period for charging detection bill 
Load Factor as per Annexure-V 
730 = Average number of hours in a month 
Provided that the units already charged in routine billing during the detection bill 
period will be adjusted. 
9.1 .4 For evidence of theft, photos and/or videos shall be recorded for exhibition before 
the competent forum. 
9.2 ILLEGAL ABSTRACTION OF ELECTRICITY BY REGISTEREI) 
CONSUMERS 
9.2.1 Following indications shall lead to further investigations by DISCO (DISCO to 
insert its name) for illegal abstraction of electricity: 
(a)  Prize bond/postal order/meter security slip removed. 
(b)  BondlTerminal cover seal of the meter broken/bogus/tampered. 
(c)  'l'erminal cover of the meter missing. 
(d)  Holes made in the meter body. 
(e)  MSB of the meter showing signs of tampering. 
(f)  Meter hanging loose/tilted/physically unbalanced. 
(g)  Meter glass broken. 
(11) Meter dead stop/burnt/display wash. 
(i) 
a) 
Meter sticking. 
Meter digits upset. 
(k) Meter running reverse. a 
(1) CT / PT damaged 
z (rn) 
(n) 
EPROM damaged. 
Neutral broken. 
APPROVED 
\THE AUTHOIT1 
4. 
> 
(0) Glass smoky/unable to read 
(p)  Polarity changed 
(q)  Shunt in meter 
(r)  Chemical in meter 
55 
(s) Meter body repasted 
(t) AMR meter communication error 
(u) Any other means which can cause interference in true recording of MDI (kW) 
and units (kWh) by the metering installation. 
9.2.2 PROCEDURE FOR ESTABLISHING ILLEGAL ABSTRACTION: 
Upon knowledge of any of the items in 9.2.1, the concerned office of DISCO (DISCO 
to insert its name) will act as follows: 
(a) Secure metering installation without removing it in the presence of the 
consumer or his representative. 
(b) Install check meter at the premises and declare it as a billing meter 
(c) DISCO (DISCO to insert its name) may take photos / record video as proof 
of theft of electricity for production before the competent forum. 
(d) Once confirmed that illegal abstraction is being done, the consumer shall be 
served with a notice by the SDO/AM(0) informing himlher of the allegations 
and giving him/her seven days for furnishing a reply. 
(e) The consumer's reply to the notice shall be examined by the XEN/DM(0). If 
the reply is not satisfactory or if no reply is received or if the allegations as 
leveled are admitted, the SDO/AM(0) with the approval of the 
XEN/DM(0)will immediately serve a detection bill to the consumer for the 
energy loss. 
9.2.3 Issuance of Detection Bill 
(a) The detection bill along with a disconnection notice for payment within seven 
days will be served by the SDO/AM(0) to the consumer. 
(b) The detection bill will be assessed on the basis of any of the following 
methods in the order of priority: 
(i) Previous consumption/Billing History 
(ii) On the basis of future undisputed consumption if no previous credible 
consumption is available. 
(iii) No of detection units = Load x Load Factor x 730 x Months 
Where: 
. Load is the connected load or sanctioned load in kW 
whichever is higher 
. Load Factor as per Annexure V 
. Months = period for charging detection bill 
• 730 = Average No of hours in a month APPROVED \ W BY 
THE AUTHORITY,/ 
56 
,- 
APPROVED \- r,1 > DI 
THE AUTHORIT'' 
Provided that the units already charged in routine billing during the 
detection bill period will be adjusted. 
(c) Maximum period for charging detection bills shall be: 
(i) Restricted to three billing cycles for general supply consumers i.e. A-
1, A-2 & general services consumers i.e. A-3 and extendable up to a 
maximum of six months, subject to approval of the Chief Executive 
Officer (CEO) of DISCO (DISCO to insert its name). The CEO may 
delegate its powers and authorize a committee comprising at least 
three officers of Chief Engineer / Director level to allow charging of 
detection bill up to six months to these consumers on case to case basis 
after proper scrutiny so that no injustice is done with the consumer. In 
such cases action will also be initiated against the concerned officer 
for not being vigilant enough. 
(ii) Restricted to maximum six billing cycles for other consumer 
categories. 
(d) Upon payment of the detection bill, the tampered meter shall be replaced by 
l)ISCO (DISCO to insert its name) immediately at the cost of consumer and 
no further action will be taken against the consumer. 
9.2.4 Review of detection bill 
(a) If the consumer objects payment or disputes over the detection bill, the 
appellant forum for revision of detection bill would be the review committee 
of I)ISCO (DISCO to insert its name). The consumer shall be given personal 
hearing by the review committee. 
(b) After decision of the review committee if the consumer does not make 
payment, within the stipulated period, the premises shall be disconnected as 
per the procedure given in this manual. 
(c) Information of such offense shall be provided to the police in writing, by 
concerned officer (not below Grade 17) or by an officer of an equivalent 
grade of DISCO (DISCO to insert its name) in accordance with relevant 
sections of Pakistan Penal Code, 1860 (Act XLV of 1860) and the Code of 
Criminal Procedure, 1898 (Act V of 1898) 
57 
APPROVED \2 
UI c THE AUTHORT''/j 
,Is,J 
CHAPTER 10 
CONSUMER COMPLAINTS 
10.1 GENERAL 
Complaints in respect of new connections, meter reading and billing, electric supply failures 
and other matters relating to supply of electric power services shall be handled by DISCO 
(DISCO to insert its name) expeditiously. In order to redress consumer complaints, 
Consumer Services Centers shall be approached for all types of complaints to be lodged by 
the consumers. Additionally, One Window Operations are established in DISCO (DISCO to 
insert its name) offices wherein all types of complaints are received from the consumers who 
arc given acknowledgement of the same with definite dates for their replies according to time 
frame for handling and redressal of such complaints. 
DISCO (DISCO to insert its name) shall handle a complaint in accordance with the procedure 
as laid down hereunder. 
10.2 COMPLAINTS REGARDING NEW CONNECTIONS 
Complaints in respect of non-availability of Application Form, Power Supply Contract, other 
material, delay in issuance of Demand Notices, etc. shall be attended properly. Connections 
shall be given as per procedure and time schedule laid down in this manual. 
10.3 COMPLAINTS REGARDING BILLING 
10.3.1 Common billing complaints including but not limited to the following shall be 
entertained for redressal /reply within the time as given below: 
(a) Errors in bills arising from wrong meter readings, wrong calculation of 
charges, etc (within 7 days from the receipt of complaint). 
(b) Tariff changes.(within 30 days from the receipt of complaint) 
(c) Replacement of defective meters as soon as possible but not later than 02 
billing cycles 
(d) Wrong application of LPS, e.g. late receipt of bank scrolls or loss of a scroll 
(within 3 days of receipt of complaint). 
(e) Adjustments arising on various matters including extension of due date and 
waiver of LPS (within 3 days from the receipt of complaint). 
(fl The delivery of bills is delayed and resultantly the consumers do not get seven 
clear days for payment. In such cases the competent officer(s) of DISCO 
(l)ISCO to insert its name) can extend the due date for payment without LPS. 
58 
(g) Complaints regarding detection bills are required to be settled by DISCO 
(DISCO to insert its name) within 15 days from the date of receipt of 
complaint. 
(h) The I Bill for a new connection shall be issued within two months of the 
date of connection. Such complaints need to be redressed within fifteen days. 
If delivered later, it should have appropriate slab corresponding to the number 
of months for which the accumulated reading bill is delivered. 
(1) Inclusion of paid amounts in next month's bills. Revenue Officers (ROs) as 
well as Bank Managers, Incharge Post Office where the last bills were paid 
are competent to amend the bills (same day) upon production of original 
previous paid bill. 
(j) Arithmetical Errors: RO/AM(CS) and SDO/AM(0) are both competent to 
correct such bills forthwith upon receipt of the complaint. 
(k) Issuance of duplicate bill: SDO/AM(0) and RO/AM(CS) and Incharge 
Customer Services Centers are competent to issue the duplicate bills on the 
same day. Consumers having internet facility can also download their 
electricity bills from the DISCO's (DISCO to insert its name) webs ite. 
(I) Change of Tariff: The complaints pertaining to change of tariff shall be 
resolved within 30 days from the date of receipt of the complaint. 
10.3.2 All the above complaints regarding billing shall be registered in the Sub 
Divisional Office or Consumer Service Center or One-Window Operation in 
DISCO (DISCO to insert its name) offices wherein dates for their rectification 
shall be given to the complainants as per procedure and time frame for handling 
and redressal of complaints. All these complaints shall also be monitored by 
DISCO (DISCO to insert its name) Complaint Cells. 
10.4 COMPLAINTS REGARDING FAILURE OF ELECTRIC SUPPLY 
10.4.1 Common complaints regarding failure of electric supply are mentioned as below: 
Individual complaints of consumers regarding failure/fluctuation of 
supply voltage other complaints of technical nature which can be 
rectified locally. 
Collective complaints due to fault Ofl 11 kV feeder. 
Collective complaints due to fuse blown up on 11 kV side of 
distribution transformer. 
Collective complaints due to damage of distribution transformer. 
Frequent Tripping of 11 kV feeders. 
Touching of branches of trees with the l-II'/LT lines. 
Defect in HT/LT jumpers, insulator, etc. 
Entangling of string used for kite flying with FIT/LT lines. 
59 
Leakage of current in poles/structures/other equipment installed on 
the system. 
Low voltage at consumer's premises. 
Fluctuations in the system due to deposit on joints of 
copper/aluminum conductor. 
Substandard quality of supply/maintenance. 
Any other technical complaint. 
10.4.2 The complaints shall normally be attended in the following order of priority: 
(a) Leakage of current immediately on receipt of such complaint. 
(b) Collective complaints of consumers. 
(c) Individual complaints of consumers 
(d) In case of damage of transformer, the supply shall be restored through 
trolley mounted transformer/alternate transformer till replacement of 
damaged transformer. Efforts will also be made to restore supply of 
affected consumers from alternate sources. 
(e) In areas where DISCO's transformer repair workshops are not 
available or there is no capacity of repair of damaged transformers on 
urgent basis, DISCO may approve private vendors for repair of 
transformers 
(0 Trimming of branches of trees touching the electric lines as well as 
other preventive maintenance work shall be carried out in order to 
avoid unnecessary tripping/damage to electric installations as per 
well-advertised program. 
(g) The complaints regarding low voltage at consumer's premises shall 
be investigated by Sub Divisional Officer/AM(0) and remedial 
measures be taken so as to improve the voltage thereby reducing the 
chances of damage to electric gadgets of the consumers. 
(h) The complaints regarding sub-standard quality of supply shall also be 
investigated by the Sub-Divisional Officer/AM(0) and remedial 
measures be adopted so as to improve the same. 
10.4.3 At the end of each shift in the complaint office/call center, an abstract shall be 
prepared as follows: 
(a) Number of complaints received 
(b) Number of complaints attended 
(c) Number of complaints lying un-attended with Sr. Nos. and reasons. 
10.4.4 DISCO (DISCO to insert its name) shall have independent Complaint Offices to 
attend such complaints. These complaint offices shall work on 24-hours basis 
even during holidays. The working of these complaint offices is to be supervised 
by higher officers as well as DISCO's (DISCO to insert its name) Complaint 
Cells. 
10.4.5 Special arrangements be made for handling complaints of ladies, senior citizens 
and handicapped consumers. 
60 
10.5 CONSUMER SERVICES 
DISCO (DISCO to insert its name) shall develop online complaint management system for 
online filing of complaints by the consumers. Moreover, DISCO (DISCO to insert its name) 
shall place the following on its website for information of general public: 
(a) Consumer Service Manual; 
(b) Performance Standards (Distribution) Rules, 2005; 
(c) Consumer Eligibility Criteria, 2003 
(d) Tariff terms and conditions 
61 
CHAPTER 11 
DISTRIBUTION AND CONSUMER SUB STATION 
11.1 GENERAL 
In case of consumers of Category Ito IV (as defined in Chapter 2) where line voltage (11kV 
or higher up to 132kV) is stepped down on the consumer's premises to the service voltage 
required by thc consumer, the facilities necessary to accommodate the transformer or 
transformers and the related equipment will be: 
(a) Distribution Sub-station 
(b) Consumer Sub-station 
11.2 DISTRIBUTION SUB STATION 
A Distribution Sub Station, is furnished, installed, owned, and maintained by DISCO 
(DISCO to insert its name) for general purpose. In case of any damage/theft of the 
distribution sub-station the responsibility for installation of another sub-station shall rest 
with the DISCO. 
11.3 CONSUMER SUB STATION 
11.3.1 A Consumer Sub Station, is furnished, installed, owned, and maintained by the 
consumer. 
       
11.3.2 'I'he responsibility for the provision of space, installation and maintenance of step 
down transformer and all allied equipment in a consumer substation shall be that of 
the consumer. The layout of the substation, the equipment installed must meet the 
specifications, design and standards as approved by DISCO (DISCO to insert its 
name). The equipment may be supplied by DISCO (DISCO to insert its name) on 
payment. However, for such facilities, the responsibility of DISCO (DISCO to insert 
its name) shall only be up to the metering point (Interconnection point). For such 
installations, the consumer shall provide land/space for the lines which will extend to 
and from the substation and obtain consents, way-leaves and authorizations 
pertaining to the right of way. 
\ R REQ, 
( 
ppVD 
 
 
 
   
NEP' 
  
          
11.3.3 If any consumer having consumer owned substation requests DISCO for shutdown; 
due to reasons including maintenance of machinery ctc, the DISCO shall shut down 
the transformer! sub-station, without any charges. however, the consumer is required 
to submit a written request three days prior to the scheduled shut down. 
11.3.4 Consumer Sub Station is meant for one consumer. In case of more than one 
onnection on the same substation /transformer with different ownerships such as 
commercial plazas/apartments/shops/residences, where bills are issued separately, 
the responsibility of maintenance, repair and replacement of the said system or up 
gradation/reinforcement thereof shall rest with the DISCO (DISCO to insert its 
name). 
62 
11.4 CONSUMER OWNED GRID STATION 
Consumers receiving supply at 66 kV and above shall at their own sole risk and expense, 
furnish, install and maintain in good and safe condition all electrical wires, lines, machinery 
and apparatus of any kind or character which may be required for; 
11.4.1 Receiving electrical energy from DISCO (DISCO to insert its name) /NTDC 
system; and utilizing such energy, by installing step down transformer and all 
other allied accessories and equipment including protection devices at the 
consumer premises. 
11.4.2 The consumer will be responsible for the payment of construction charges and all 
costs associated with line extensions payable as per provision laid down in the 
Consumer Eligibility Criteria, 2003. 
11.4.3 The design of the Grid station shall conform to Grid Code, Distribution Code and 
Safety Code. 
11.5 METERING INSTALLATION REQUIREMENTS 
11.5.1 Metering installation shall comply with Pakistan Standard Institute (PSI) or 
International Electric Technical Commission (IEC) standard or Standards 
developed/adopted by LISCO (DISCO to insert its name)/NTDC. 
DISCO(1)ISCO to insert its name) /NTDC shall determine the location and 
method of installation for all metering equipment as provided in the Distribution 
Code, Grid Code and related manuals. 
Whenever any electrical wiring is modified, new metering equipment complying 
with these service requirements shall be used, except when in the opinion of 
DISCO (DISCO to insert its name) /NTDC the existing metering equipment is 
satisfactory and adequate to register all energy to be supplied. 
11.5.2 
\c)
1ER R '7' 
1 APPROVED .5.3 
BY 
THE AUTHORITY 
11.5.4 Line side (unmetered) conductors and load side (metered) conductors shall be 
prohibited from occupying the same enclosure. 
11.6 GROUNI)ING SYSTEM 
As defined in 1)istribution Code, Grid Code and as per the standard utility practice, proper 
neutral and protective carthing/grounding system shall be installed by the consumer in the 
consumer owned grid station and checked by authorized experts of DISCO (DISCO to insert 
its name) / NTDC. 
SAFETY 
All safety equipment including fire extinguishers and other relevant equipment shall be made 
available at the Grid Station. 
63 
12.2.6 DISCO (DISCO to insert its name) will issue a notice to the 
Consumer(s)/Person(s), in case of illegal construction, extension of building 
under or near the distribution/ transmission lines for violation of safety standards. 
• ' APPROVED 
64 THORIT,,,/I 
CHAPTER 12 
SAFETY AND SECURITY 
12.1 GENERAL 
In order to prevent accidents which may result in injury or death, or damage to public or 
1)ISCO (DISCO to insert its name) INTDC property, the consumers shall abide by the general 
safety requirements of the "Safety Code". 
DISCO (DISCO to insert its name) /NTDC shall take all the safety and security measures to 
avoid fatal/non-fatal accidents. The consumers shall be educated through all possible means 
to observe safety measures in order to avoid any casualty especially during the monsoon 
season. 
12.2 OBLIGA'IiONS OF DISCO/NTDC 
DISCO (DISCO to insert its name) /NTDC shall monitor and implement the safety and 
security plan for consumers. The safety and security objectives can be achieved by adopting 
good engineering practice, including measures as described below: 
12.2.1 Operation and maintenance of I)ISCO's (DISCO to insert its name) /NTDC 
distribution system /Network shall be carried out only by the DISCO's (DISCO 
to insert its name) /NTDC authorized and trained personnel. 
12.2.2 DISCO's (DISCO to insert its name) / NTDC system equipment, including 
overhead lines, poles/structtires/towers underground cables, transformers, panels, 
cutouts, meters, service drops, etc. shall be installed and maintained in accordance 
with Grid Code, Distribution Code and other relevant documents. 
12.2.3 To ensure proper operation of DISCO's (DISCO to insert its name) /NTDC 
network under abnormal conditions (short-circuits, overloading, etc.) appropriate 
protective relays shall be installed and properly coordinated to ensure isolation of 
faulty circuits. 
12.2.4 The earthing systems installed shall be dimensioned and regularly tested to ensure 
protection from shock hazards. 
12.2.5 The steel structure installed on the public places shall be earthed at ONE point 
through steel/copper conductor, in accordance with the DISCO's (DISCO to 
insert its name) INTDC laid down procedures. 
0\1ER !  1, \ 
APPROVED 
BY 
THE AUTHORI' 
NEp  
-J Ui 
12.3 OBLIGATIONS OF THE CONSUMER 
The consumer is responsible to monitor and implement safety and security standards within 
his/her own premises. The safety and security objectives can be achieved by adopting good 
engineering practice, including the following measures: 
12.3.1 No matter how small, electrical installations, including earthing system, must be 
installed by competent Electrical Engineers and/or authorized wiring contractors, 
which must be inspected and certified by an Electric Inspector. 
12.3.2 Wiring materials and electrical equipment installed must conform to the approved 
relevant standards and be of a good quality. 
12.3.3 For the protection of the consumer it is necessary that electrical installation at the 
consumer's premises conform to the rules established by DISCO (DISCO to 
insert its name) 1NTDC and approved by the Authority as per the terms and 
conditions of the Consumer Eligibility Criteria 2003, Performance Standards 
(Distribution) Rules, 2005, Distribution Code, Safety Code and Grid Code. 
12.3.4 No additions, alterations, repairs and adjustments to existing installations, (except 
such replacement of lamps, fans, fuses, switches, low voltage domestic appliance 
and fittings as in no way alter the capacity and the character of the installation), 
shall be carried out within a consumer's premises, except by an authorized wiring 
contractor. 
12.3.5 In case of fatal electrical accident to a person, an immediate report shall also be 
made to the nearest police station and to the DISCO's (1)ISCO to insert its name) 
Complaint center /NTDC. 
12.3.6 Any consumer committing a breach of procedures/rules outlined above shall 
render himself/herself liable for disconnection of his/her electric power and legal 
action. 
12.3.7 No Consumer can construct/ extend the building under or near the transmission/ 
distribution lines or within close proximity of the lines. 
12.3.8 If any existing consumer has to carry out re-wiring (due to any reason but not 
limited to catching fire/short circuiting) , he/she is required to provide a wiring 
test report to DISCO (DISCO to insert its name) afresh issued by the Electric 
Inspector or his authorized wiring contactor. 
65 
12.4 SOME USEFUL SAFETY TIPS 
Electricity, while being a very useful and convenient form of energy, has a number of 
hazards, and consumers would be wise to treat electrical installation with respect. 
The following tips shall be kept in mind: 
12.4.1 Flazardous conditions on utility systems shall be monitored and immediately 
reported to DISCO (DISCO to insert its name): 
Damaged or faulty insulators. 
Damaged cross arms 
Broken strands or wires on overhead conductors, or fallen wires. 
Uneven sagging of lines/Insufficient ground clearances of lines. 
Leaning or damage to poles/structures /towers, 
Branches of trees interfering with overhead conductors. 
Loose stay- wires. 
Construction of new roads, buildings, or other structures near/under 
the line. 
1)amaged or faulty transformer structures, including oil leakages 
Leakage of currents in poles and other stru ctures /towers. 
Unsafe working practices by employees 
RCDs (Residual Current Devices), also called Earth-Leakage Circuit Breakers 
(ELCBs), Ground-Fault Circuit Interrupters (GFCIs) are extremely sensitive 
circuit breakers that can prevent fires and shocks in electrical installations. Obtain 
specialist advice on their installation at appropriate locations in your electrical 
systems. 
12.4.3 Electricity is more dangerous in the presence of water. During rains, near 
swimming pools, tanks or other water bodies, in laboratories, on construction 
sites, for temporary functions/weddings, etc., special care must be taken to use 
proper wiring and protective equipment, especially RCDs. Such installations need 
to be inspected on a regular basis 
12.4.4 Use proper circuit-breakers in preference to re-wire able fuse cut-outs. 
12.4.5 Metallic and chemical string must not be used for kite flying as it poses serious 
danger to life and damages electricity installations. 
12.4.6 Safe clearances from electricity conductors and equipment (e.g., hazardous 
extension of balconies at the upper stories of houses in mohallas which comes 
within close proximity of electric lines) must be maintained to avoid 
electrocution. 
Connection may not be granted where safety hazards are observed and clearance 
(horizontal/vertical) of electricity supply lines is low, to discourage people from 
construction of houses under the lines to avoid accidents. 
66 
(a)  
(b)  
(c)  
(d)  
(e)  
(t) 
(g)  
(h)  
(i)  
a) 
(k) 
12.4.8 Animals must not be tied with poles/structures/towers/stay wires in order to avoid 
accidents/electrocutions. 
12.4.9 In case of non-compliance of safety standards or already issued notices (by 
DISCO (DISCO to insert its name) to the consumer, local building 
department/concerned civic authority is responsible to demolish the illegal 
constructed / extended building near or under the transmission / distribution lines 
after receiving information from concerned DISCO (DISCO to insert its name). 
//
Z 
67 
CHAPTER 13 
EFFICIENT USE AND CONSERVATION OF ELECTRIC POWER 
13.1 GENERAL 
DISCO (DISCO to insert its name) shall take steps towards improving the quality and 
reliability of electric service to maximize the value of the energy that is used and to increase 
the sale of power. 
Electricity adds to the quality of life, hence it makes good sense to use it wisely. Consumers 
are advised to be "energy smart". 
13.2 ENERGY EFFICIENCY AND ENERGY SAVINGS 
The use of present day technology boosts the efficiency of energy systems — such as the 
super-efficient compact fluorescent lamps (CFL), Light Emitting Diodes (LEDs) bulbs, etc. 
These bulbs yield pleasing light as a conventional incandescent lamps while consuming less 
electricity. 
There are many other proven ways to maintain and operate energy systems to save energy 
costs all the time, many of which are at low or no cost. 
13.2.1 Many of the quickest and easiest ways to save energy also cost little or nothing. 
In fact, a lot of energy savings can be achieved by doing the following: 
(a) lurn off lights when not needed. 
(b) Remove unneeded light bulbs. 
(c) When replacing bulbs, use lower wattage or more efficient ones. 
(d) Reduce air conditioning thermostat setting. 
(e) Reduce air conditioning during unoccupied hours. 
(0 Reduce air conditioning before the end of operating hours. 
(g) Flave the ventilating and air conditioning systems serviced and adjusted. 
(h) Turn off machines and equipment when not needed. 
(i) Make sure all automatic controls are in good working condition 
j) Ensure all motive machinery is properly lubricated and maintained. 
13.2.2 The following steps may be read carefully: 
(a) Find out last year's energy use and cost. Twenty to thirty percent savings 
may be possible with little effort. 
(b) I)o an energy "audit". Take a good look at how and where you use — and 
waste — energy. 
(c) Get some expert help for the audit if needed. 
(d) Ask friends for their ideas and listen to their concerns about health and 
comfort. They should be fully involved in energy management efforts. 
(e) I)ecide the top priority things to do. Include them in the Energy Action 
Plan. 
68 
(f) Do them — with outside help if needed. '['he sooner a start is made, the 
better savings are made. 
(g) Keep a record of savings. See if what has been done is working and how 
much being saved. 
13.3 LIGH'iING 
13.3.1 Lighting energy can be wasted in several ways, such as: 
(a) Inefficient light sources — when the lamp or fixture is inefficient in 
converting electricity to light, using more watts (units of electric power) 
than necessary to produce the lumens (units of light output); 
(b) Illumination losses — when dirt or some other obstruction blocks some of 
the light; or when the light source is too far away from what you want 
illuminated; 
(c) Over lighting — when more light is used than is needed; when a "free" 
source such as day light is not used; and when lights are on, for no reason 
(e.g., when no one is present). 
13.3.2 Three major ways to save wasting energy are as follows: 
(a) 'l'urning lights off when they are not needed; 
(b) Reducing light levels wherever you have more light than you need; 
(c) Installing more efficient lighting or controls. 
13.4 INFORMATION ABOUT BENEFITS OF SAVING ELECTRIC POWER 
DISCO (DISCO to insert its name) shall provide sufficient information to the consumers to 
make them aware of the benefits of efficient use and saving of electric power which in turn 
would result in savings to the utility. DISCO (DISCO to insert its name) shall publish 
pamphlets or make advertisements or issue handbills from time to time for the education of 
consumers with regard to efficient use and saving of electric power. I)ISCO (DISCO to insert 
its name) shall inform consumers about energy efficiency opportunities by way of 
"information inserts" included in monthly bills. 
13.5 MONITORING USE OF ENERGY 
The consumer shall be educated and encouraged to prepare the figures of monthly electricity 
bills for the last calendar year and this year by collecting from the monthly bills and recording 
in the table given below. Comparison of these figures on monthly basis shall give the 
"baseline" for making efforts for potential savings. In this way, keeping in view all the 
suggestions for saving and keeping a strict watch on the energy consumption, some fruitful 
results are achievable and it will be observed that energy management efforts actually do pay 
off. 
69 
TABLE FOR CONSUMPTiON OF ELECTRICITY 
Month 
Electricity use (kwh) Electricity cost 
Last year This year % difference Last year This year % difference 
January 
February 
March 
April 
May 
June 
July 
August 
September 
October 
November 
December 
Total 
13.6 GENERAL TIPS-INDUSTRIAL OPERATIONS 
13.6.1 Saving energy makes good business sense. Many companies think of energy as a 
fixed overhead but saving energy is actually one of the easiest ways to reduce 
costs. 
13.6.2 Save money: Simply by switching machines off after use, or turning the 
cooling/heating down as per weather requirement, real savings can be made in the 
energy bill. 
13.6.3 Offer better value to your customers cutting overheads means production costs 
will go down, making your products and services more competitive 
13.6.4 Here are some tips specifically for manufacturing! or industrial processes, to help 
save energy in key areas: 
/ (a) Motors 
(i) Keep your motors maintained / extend your motors operating life. 
If a motor is not working at its maximum efficiency, it can add to the 
energy costs. Ensure that the motors are always well maintained and 
voltage is balanced on all phases. 
(ii) Use high efficiency motors 
1-ligher Efficiency Motors save energy. 
(iii) Don't keep motors running on no-load 
Always check that motors are switched off when not in use, as even a 
motor at no-load uses a large amount of energy. 
70 
(b) Compressed air 
(i) Find and fix leaks 
Most businesses using compressed air can save up to 30% simply by 
fixing any leaks. 
(ii) Try to lower the operating pressure 
Reducing the operating pressure will save energy. 
(iii) Ensure there is a good supply of cool air around the compressor 
This will ensure it doesn't get overheated and use more energy than 
necessary. 
(c) Refrigeration 
(i) Keep freezer doors closed 
Ensure freezer doors do not stay open un-necessarily. 
(ii) Ensure your system is at the right temperature 
Even a slight difference in temperature-setting can create a substantial 
difference in your bill. 
(iii) Don't let the condensers get overheated 
Make sure refrigerators are located in a place with sufficient airflow. 
(d) Improve I1eatin2 operation Systems 
By checking burner air to fuel ratios and the heat transfer surfaces. 
(e) Improve Pumpin2 Operation Systems  
/	
By matching the pumps to system requirements 
13.7 SUGGESTIONS AND RECOMMENDATIONS 
13.7.1 Form an Energy Team 
Energy teams in manufacturing facilities track and report energy use, identify energy-
saving opportunities, develop an energy plan, and implement cost-saving measures. 
Energy teams typically include members from plant and process engineering, 
maintenance engineering, procurement, and production. Any energy team will enjoy 
greater success with support and involvement from senior managers, who can remove 
barriers and commit resources to projects. 
71 
13.7.2 Objective of Energy Team: 
Performing a formal energy assessment is one of the best ways that your team can 
develop a cost-effective plan to lower plant energy costs. 
The energy assessment team (which sometimes includes outside experts in energy 
management and troubleshooting) works both during and after the assessment 
process to: 
(a) Evaluate all of the industrial systems to calculate how and where your plant 
uses energy, 
(b) Flelp find opportunities to increase efficiency, 
(c) Determine potential upgrades and emerging technologies that might work for 
your plant, and 
(d) Implement cost-saving measures. 
(e) Employee Involvement 
13.7.3 Emphasis will be given on the employees' involvement by educating and 
encouraging them to follow the tips like: 
(a) l'urn off lights ,when leaving work areas, 
(b) Report leaking faucets, lavatory fixtures, piping etc. 
(c) Keep windows and outside doors closed, if air conditioners are in use. 
(d) Leave thermostats at a constant setting to avoid forcing the system OFF and 
ON. 
(e) 'I'urn off all tools and portable appliances when not in use, 
(1) Assign responsibility for turning off designated items to specific employees. 
13.7.4 Recommendations 
(a) Install power factor correction equipment 
(b) '[urn OFF equipment when not in use 
(c) Begin a practice of monitoring electric demand 
(d) Repair compressed air leaks 
V (e) Redirect air compressor intake to use outside air 
(f) Lower air pressure in compressors 
(g) Repair steam valve leakages 
Install water cooled chillers instead of replacing air cooled chillers 
Install Speed controllers on twisting machines 
Replace standard Fluorescent lighting with energy efficient tubes/lamps 
Reduce luminance to minimum required levels via delamping 
Install timers on lighting systems, where necessary 
 
- 
APPROVED ( W BY > 
HE AUTHORITY 
 
 
  
72 
   
/VEP' 
CHAPTER 14 
RIGHTS AND OBLIGATIONS VIS-A-VIS CONSUMER AND DISCO 
(DISCO to insert its name) 
14.1 ACCESS TO/AT THE CONSUMER'S PREMISES 
A duly authorized employee of DISCO (DISCO to insert its name) shall be entitled at all 
reasonable times, and on informing the occupier of his intention after giving a notice of clear 
24 hours (However, no notice is required for conducting raid in case of theft/illegal 
abstraction of electricity), to enter the premises to which energy is or has been, or is to be 
supplied by DISCO (DISCO to insert its name), for the purpose of: 
14.1.1 Examining, inspecting and testing the electric supply lines, meters, maximum 
demand indicators or other measuring apparatus, electric wires, fittings, works or 
an apparatus for the supply or use of energy, whether belonging to DISCO 
(DISCO to insert its name) or to the Consumer, or. 
14.1.2 Ascertaining the amount of energy supplied or the electrical quantity contained 
in the supply or the apparatus, or. 
14.1.3 Removing, where a supply of energy is no longer required, or where DISCO 
(DISCO to insert its name) is authorized to take away and cut-off such supply, 
any electric supply lines, meters, maximum demand indicators or other measuring 
apparatus, fittings, works or apparatus belonging to DISCO (DISCO to insert its 
name), or. 
14.1.4 Along all other things necessary or incidental to the proper supply or maintaining 
such supply to the consumer's premises. 
14.2 FACILITATIONTO BE PROVIDEI) BY TIlE CONSUMER 
14.2.1 DISCO (DISCO to insert its name) authorized staff member has access to meters, 
service connections and other property owned by it which may be located in 
consumer's premises for purposes of installation, maintenance, operation or 
removal of the property at the time service is to be terminated. 
14.2.2 The consumer's utility system shall be open for inspection to authorized 
representatives of DISCO (DISCO to insert its name). The consumer's failure to 
do so within a reasonable period of time may result in disconnection. 
14.2.3 Consumers must provide access to all electric meters upon request for billing 
purposes. If a premises is unoccupied/locked, an appointment to obtain meter 
readings will suflice for a maximum period of two (2) months. After that, a new 
ap ointment will be required to update the readings. 1ER 1 
I, ±fi APPROVED 
BY 
HE AUTHORI" 
73 
IY 
'a 
14.7.1 
9- - 
L APPROVED \&. 
EAUTHQRIT)k 
— _* NEP9.J" 4.7.2 Separate service is required for x-ray units over 5 kVA, welder units over 3 kVA, 
radio transmitters and resistance welders. 
Consumers who operate equipment which causes detrimental voltage fluctuations 
(such as but not limited to, hoists, welders, x-ray apparatus, radio transmitters, 
elevator motors, compressors and furnaces) must reasonably limit such 
fluctuations upon request by DISCO (DISCO to insert its name). The Consumer 
will be required to comply with the necessary corrective measures. 
14.3 PROPERTY I)AMAGE 
14.3.1 DISCO (DISCO to insert its name) is not responsible for any loss or damage 
caused by any negligence or wrongful act of a consumer or his authorized 
representative in installing, maintaining, operating or using any or all appliances, 
facilities or equipment. 
14.3.2 The consumer will be held responsible for damage to DISCO's (DISCO to insert 
its name) meter installation and other property or facilities resulting from the use 
or operation of appliances and facilities on consumer's premises, including but 
not limited to damage caused by electricity, steam, hot water or chemicals. 
14.3.3 If a consumer, new applicant, developer or other person is found to be responsible 
for any damage done to the DISCO's (DISCO to insert its name) property; such 
damages shall be reimbursed to DISCO (DISCO to insert its name). 
14.4 LIABILITY OF THE CONSUMER FOR DAMAGE TO 1)ISCO APPARATUS 
The consumer shall be solely responsible for and shall pay for any loss oi or damage to, any 
electric supply lines, meters and/or other apparatus in use of the consumer for supply of 
energy purpose, whether caused maliciously or through negligence or default on the part of 
the consumer or any of his/her employees, except reasonable wear and tear and loss or 
damages arising out of defects in the aforesaid electric supply lines, main fuses, meters and/or 
other apparatus belonging to DISCO (DISCO to insert its name) on the consumer's premises. 
143 RIGhT OF WAY 
The right of way shall be the responsibility of the applicant/consumer 
14.6 FAILURE OF SUPPLY DUE TO FORCE MAJEURE 
DISCO (DISCO to insert its name) shall not be liable for any claims for loss, damage or 
compensation whatsoever, arising out of failure of supply when such failure is due to Force 
Maj eure. 
14.7 OBLIGATIONS OF CONSUMERS 
DiSCO (DISCO to insert its name) may require the consumers to provide, at their 
own expense, special furnace type transformers and reactors and capacitors 
74 
sufficient to limit secondary short-circuit current values. In such cases, DISCO 
(DISCO to insert its name) shall furnish energy at 11 kV. 
14.7.4 The consumer should also make arrangements to filter out or prevent harmonic 
distortions traveling onto/interfering with the I)ISCO's (DISCO to insert its 
name) system. 
14.8 POWER FACTOR 
DISCO (DISCO to insert its name) encourages consumers to maintain a power factor of at 
least 90% to avoid penalties. 
14.9 CONSUMER'S OBLIGATION TO COMPLY 
Consumers must use their best endeavors to avoid any non-compliance of this Manual within 
the time period specified in any notice of non-compliance sent by DISCO (DISCO to insert 
its name). 
14.10 DISCONNECTION OF SUPPLY FOR NON-COMPLIANCE 
l)ISCO may disconnect is the supply to a consumer if, 
a) The consumer has not fulfilled an obligation to comply with this manual; 
b) The DISCO has given the consumer seven (7) Business days written notice of 
disconnection (such notice to be in addition to the notice already given); and 
c) The consumer fails to comply with the notice. 
APPROVED 
4ATH<AUTH7 
/VEPR1'  
75 
APPROVED 
BY 
THE AUTHORITY 
N ERf 
7 
CHAPTER 15 
Violation of Instructions 
15.1 DISCO (DISCO to insert its name) shall ensure that it complies with the provisions 
of the Consumer Service Manual while dealing with consumer complaints. 
15.1.1 The Consumer Service Manual shall be treated as an applicable document as 
defined in Chapter 1. In case the consumer/complainant is not satisfied with the 
response/decision of the distribution company or the distribution company does 
not reply at all, the consumer shall have the following options: 
15.1.2 The consumer may file a complaint with Provincial Office of Inspection in respect 
of metering, billing and collection of tariff applicable under section 38 of the Act. 
Any person aggrieved by any decision or order of the Provincial Office of 
Inspection may, within thirty days of the receipt of the order, prefer an appeal to 
the Authority in the prescribed manner. 
15.1.3 Under section 39 of the Act, any consumer/interested person, including a 
Provincial Government may file a written complaint with the Authority against a 
licensee for contravention of any provision of the Act or any order, rule, 
regulation, licence or instruction made or issued thereunder. The complaint shall 
be processed under the Complaint Handling and Dispute Resolution (Procedure) 
Rules, 2015. 
15.1.4 Under section 35-A of the Act, any consumer/interested person may file 
complaint with NEPRA regarding over billing, noncompliance of instructions 
respecting metering and collection of approved charges, disconnection in case of 
nonpayment of charges, electric power theft and use of energy for purposes other 
than for which it was supplied. 
15.1.5 DISCO (DISCO to insert its name) shall comply with the 
orders/decisions/instructions as may be passed by the Authority with regard to the 
complaint which shall be enforced under the laws/rules. 
76 
LIST OF ANNEXURES 
Annexure — I Application Form for New Connection 
Annexure —II Power Supply Contract 
Annexure — III Time Frame for New Connections 
Annexure — IV Security Deposit Rates 
Annexure — V Percentage of Load Factor for Different Types of Connections 
Annexure — VI Load Assessment Criteria 
T APPROVED \'V' 
BY 
UTHORITy EA} y  
77 
±i1 APPROVED 
w BY 
\THE AUTHGRTYJ 
Annexure —I 
APPLICATION FORM 
(FOR CONNECTION) 
(DISCO to insert its name and logo) 
Type of Connection 
• Domestic U Commercial • Industrial 
Agriculture 0 Temporary U Other (Please specify) • 
Purpose of application 
• New Connection U Change of Name U Extension of load 
Reduction of load • Change of Tariff Other (Please specify) • U 
Load applied: 
Serial No. Electrical Appliances Quantity Load (Watts) 
1.  
2.  
Light(s) 
Fan s) 
3.  Air-conditioner(s) 
4.  Heater 
5.  Washing machine 
6.  Refri:erator 
7.  Light plu 
8.  Power Plug 
9.  Motor 
Other  
Total Load (kW) 
PARr I (FOR OFFICE USE) 
Application No.  
Date Name of Sub Div. 
 
    
1.  Name ofApplicant 
2.  Father's/llusband's name 
3.  Complete address 
required 
where the connection is 
4.  Applicant's Mailing Address 
5.  CNIC 
6.  Applicant E-Mail address 
7.  Phone No. 
8.  Mobile No 
9.  Size of Plot Maria Kanals Sq.Yds 
10. Reference No. of existing connection(s) if any 
ignature of Applicant) (Signature of witness) 
78 
Applicant's Receipt 
FOR OFFICE USE: 
Application for  (purpose of application) has been received from Mr. 
 with DISCO (DISCO to insert its name) and has been allotted 
Registration No./Case ID.  dated  
Signature of Officer/Official:  
Date:  
Name of Sub-1)ivision/Division/Circle 
DOCUMENTS TO BE ATTACHED WITH THE APPLICATION FORM 
a) Ownership proof of the premises as determined by DISCO (DISCO to insert its name) 
where connection is required. Conversely provision of electricity connection does not 
necessarily constitute proof of ownership of the premises. 
b) An affidavit by the owner of the premises on non-judicial stamp paper worth Rs. 50/- as 
per schedule I of the Stamp Act 1899 (or as amended through Stamp Act, 1899 from 
time to time) to the effect that no connection existed previously at the premises for which 
connection is applied for and that he/she shall pay DISCO (DISCO to insert its name) 
any outstanding dues in respect of any previous connection which existed at the premises 
in question, if noticed later on. Further, in the affidavit it will be mentioned that the 
applicant is not defaulter of any other electricity connection in DISCOs (DISCO to insert 
its name) or / and in any other distribution company, and if found at any stage, his/her 
connection may be disconnected after issuance of prior seven days' notice. 
If the applicant is a tenant or a person other than the landlord/owner then no objection 
certificate from the owner/landlord along with the ownership proof and affidavit as 
mentioned above are required. The Owner/landlord will also affirm on a non-judicial 
stamp paper worth Rs.50/- as per schedule 1 of the Stamp Act 1899 that he/she would 
be responsible for payment of the default amount of his/her tenant (if any) 
d) Attested copies of CNIC of the applicant and a witness. In case of tenancy case, attested 
copy of CNIC of the landlord/owner is also required. 
c) If the connection is applied in the name of a company, duly incorporated under the law, 
following additional documents shall be attached: 
i) Certificate of incorporation; 
ii) Resolution of Board of Directors authorizing a person to sign and execute the 
application and agreement form; 
iii) List of directors with complete addresses and copies of their computerized 
national identity cards. 
\/
0 Approved map or approved site plan or approved layout plan (LOP) or NOC by the 
Civic Agency/Authority. Flowever, the condition of the approved map or approved site 
plan or approved layout plan or NOC for houses and shops can be relaxed by the DISCO 
79 
f APPROVED 
BY 
THE AUTHORITY 
4 
> 
10. Nai of Official: 
signation: 
80 
(DISCO to insert its name) in case of rural areas where map /site plan /layout plan/NOC 
are not applicable/required. 
There shall be no requirement of approved map or approved site plan or 
approved layout plan (LOP) or NOC by the Civic Agency/Authority for 
another connection or for extension! reduction of load where already any permanent! 
regular connection exists at the premises. 
ii. There shall be no requirement of approved map or approved site plan or 
approved layout plan (LOP) or NOC by the Civic Agency/Authority for 
premises which are located inside approved housing schemes! societies/plazas/multi-
storey buildings. 
iii. 1'herc shall be no requirement of approved map or approved site plan or 
approved layout plan (LOP) or NOC by the Civic Agency/Authority in the 
areas where the land is either not acquired by the concerned Civic Agency/Authority 
or the area is not developed by concerned Civic Agency/Authority. 
iv. 'I'hcrc shall be no requirement of approved map or approved site plan or 
approved layout plan (LOP) or NOC by the Civic Agency/Authority in the old 
colonies! abadies where the land belongs to the native people inherited from their 
forefathers. 
v. It will be ensured before provision of connection that there are no restraining 
orders! Court orders with respect to non-provision of connection in the area. 
g) Wiring test report duly issued by Electric Inspector or his authorized wiring contractor 
h) In case of connection for stone crushing plants NOC from concerned Environmental 
Protection Agency is necessary. 
PART II 
(FOR OFFICE USE) 
1. Date of Survey/Verification of Test Report  
2. Authenticity of particulars given by consumer 
a. Load at site kW 
b. Tariff Applicable  
3. Material required (as per attached estimate) 
4. Size of plot  
5. Proposed Reference No.  
6. Whether area electrified! un electrified/Housing Society 
7. Whether Transformer is available or not:  
8. Whether II kV feeder is available or not(name of feeder):  
9. Whether Grid Station is available or not(name of Grid Station) 
12. Load Sanctioned: 
13. Date of sanction 
14. Name of Officer: 
15. Designation:  
16. Demand Notice for Capital Cost: 
a. No.  
b. Issue Date:  
c. Total amount:  
d. Paid On (Date):  
e. Total Paid Amount:  
f. Bank Name and Branch:  
g. Date of Return of Demand Notice by the applicant to DISCO(DISCO to insert its 
name):  
17. Demand Notice for Security Deposit: 
a. No.  
b. Issue Date:  
c. Total amount:  
d. Paid On (Date):  
e. Total Paid Amount:  
f. Bank Name and Branch:  
g. Date of Return of Demand Notice by the applicant to DISCO(DISCO to insert its 
name):  
18. Reason(s) if application is not sanctioned and returned 
(Signature of officer with designation) 
1'ART III 
(i) Connection installation 
a. Date of metering installation  
b. Name of Incharge installing the meter 
(ii) Meter's Particulars 
a. Meter No 
b. Make  
i. kWh ii. kVARh iii. MDI 
e. Initial reading  
f. Multiplying factor if any 
g. Seals/Postal order No  
81 
c. Meter type 
d. Capacity  
(Signature of official with designation) 
(Signature of officer with designation) 
PART IV 
Submission of documents to RO/AM(CS) for billing vide Letter No  
Dated: 
(Signature of Officer with Designation) 
NOTE": Copy of the complete set (part Ito IV) completely filled in and signed by the officer 
of DISCO (DISCO to interest its name) will also be provided to the consumer for his/her 
record. 'I'he consumer may lodge complaint against non-provision of such complete copy. 
(Signature of the Applicant as a token of receipt of a copy of the set) 
82 
Y APPROVED 
<EAUTH 
*  
CNIC No. 
Signat 
Annexure-IL 
Power Supply Contract 
(DISCO to insert its name and Logo) 
To be executed on non-judicial stamp paper worth Rs. 50/ - 
Contract for Consumer Connection 9.nd Supply of Electric Power 
This Contract for Consumer Connection and Supply of Electric Power ("Power Supply Contract") 
is entered into between Mr./Ms./Mrs. M/s ("Consumer") AND DISCO (DISCO 
to insert its name) on the day of , at for the purpose of 
(New connection/change of name/extension of load/reduction of load) 
Whereas the applicant had applied vide Application Form dated  for a load of 
kW to DISCO (DISCO to insert its name) under tariff  
Whereas DISCO (DISCO to insert its name) had issued demand notices bearing No. dated 
 (capital cost) and No. dated (security deposit) in the favour of 
consumer amounting to Rs. and Rs. respectively which were duly 
deposited by the consumer on vide receipt no. in Bank. 
Whereas the consumer has in line with the provisions of Consumer Eligibility Criteria, 2003 
deposited the charges, complied with the safety requirements and its electrical installations 
checked and verified by the Electric Inspector or his authorized wiring contractor. 
Whereas DISCO (1)ISCO to insert its name) has also verified the electrical installation at the 
consumer's premises and ensured its soundness for the purpose of its connection to its distribution 
system. 
Now therefore, the parties to this contract hereby agree as follows: 
DISCO (DISCO to insert its name) shall provide the distribution services to the consumer in 
accordance with the terms and conditions approved by National Electric Power Regulatory 
Authority ("Authority"). 
The Consumer Service Manual provides the rights and duties of both DISCO(DISCO to insert its 
name) and the consumer which shall be binding on both the parties and shall be referred to by the 
parties to deal with different aspects of services to be rendered by I)ISCO(DISCO to insert its 
name). 
In witness whereof, the parties hereto execute this Contract of Power Supply on this day of 
DISCO: 
Name 
  
Consumer: 
Name: 
  
    
    
        
        
Signature 
Witness: 
Name 
 
Signature 
   
    
     
83 
Annexure — III 
'rime Frame for New Connections 
CONNECTION CATEGORY-i 
Load (up to 15 kW) at 400 V  
Sr. No. Description Responsibility Days 
Registration of application in the Sub 
Division/Division, submission of wiring 
test report, site survey and verification of 
test report 
-SDC, LS, SDO 
(for A1,A2, A3) connections 
-Head Draftsman/XEN/DM(0) 
(for other connections) 
4 
Preparation of Service cost estimate & 
vetting, issuance of demand notice, 
-LS, SDO/AM(0) (for Ai,A2, A3) 
connections 
-Head Draftsman/XEN/DM(0) (for 
other connections) 
6 
3 
Issuance of SCO! Work Order! 
Instructions, Approval of Store 
requisition/Issue of material and execution 
of work order 
-LS, SDO/AMO (for Ai,A2, A3) 
connections 
-XEN/I)M(0) (for other connections) 11 
4 Metering installation 
-LS 
-SDO/AM(0) 
-XEN/DM(0) 
9 
30 
CONNECTION CATEGORY-2 
Load (above 15 kW but not exceeding 70 kW) at 400 V 
Ui 
\ru A 
Sr. No. Description Days Rcsponsibi 1' 
1 
Registration of application in the 
Division, submission of wiring test 
report, site survey and verification 
of test report 
Head Draftsman/XEN 
/DM (0) 4 
2 
Preparation of Service cost estimate 
& vetting and issuance of demand 
notice 
XEN/DM (0) 6 
3 
Issuance of SCO/ Work Order! 
Instructions, Approval of Store 
requisition/Issue of material and 
execution of work order 
-do- 25 
4 Metering installation 
XEN/DM (0), 
XEN/DM (M&T) 
S.DO/AM (0), 
9 
44 
84 
CONNECTION CATEGORY-3 
Load (above 70 kW but not eAceeding 500 kW) at 400 V 
Sr. No. Description Responsibility Days 
I 
Registration of application in the Circle, 
submission of wiring test report, site 
survey and verification of test report 
I-lead I)raftsman 
/SE/Manager (0) 5 
2 Preparation of Service cost estimate & 
vetting and issuance of demand notice SE/Manager (0) 7 
3 
Issuance of SCO/ Work Order! 
Instructions, Approval of Store 
requisition/Issue of material and execution 
of work order 
PD (Construction), 
XEN/DM (0) 36 
4 Metering installation 
XEN/DM (0), 
XEN/DM (M&T) 
SDO/AM (0), 
10 
58 
CON1ECTION CATEGORY-4 
Load (above 500 kW but not exceedin&  5000 kW) at 11kV or 33 kV 
Sr. No. Description Responsibility Days 
1 
Registration of application in CEO Office, 
submission of wiring test report, site survey 
and verification of test report 
Manager (P&E) 10 
2 Preparation of Service cost estimate & 
vetting and issuance of demand notice -do. 20 
3 
Issuance of SCOt Work Order! Instructions, 
Approval of Store requisitionllssue of 
material and execution of work order 
P1) (Construction), 
XEN/DM (0) 55 
4 Metering installation 
SE/Manager (0), 
Manager (M&T) 
XEN/DM (0), 
21 
106 
85 
CONNECTION CATEGORY-5 
All loads at 66 kV and above  
Sr. No. Description Responsibility Days 
1 
Registration of application in the 
CEO Office, submission of wiring 
test report, site survey and 
verification of test report 
Mgr. (P&E) 30 
2 
Preparation of Service cost estimate 
& vetting and issuance of demand 
notice 
CE (T&G) Office 
of CEO Office of 
MD, NTDC 
15 
3 
Issuance of SCO! Work Order! 
Instructions, Approval of Store 
requisition/Issue of material and 
execution of work order 
CFO 
- CI'('1'&G) 
- PD (USC) 
411 
4 Metering installation 
Manager (P&E) 
Manager (M&T) 
SE/Manager (0), 
XEN/DM (P&I), 
XEN/DM (T&I) 
40 
496 
Explanation: 
"In case the distribution company does not take the required action within the stipulated time 
prescribed in the above table, the distribution company shall have to give reasons for each day delay 
in writing to the consumer with a copy to the Authority; the Authority may accept or reject such 
reasons. However, the delay shall not absolve the distribution company from the obligation to 
complete the required action (i.e. issuance of demand notice or provision of connection, as the case 
may be)". 
V 86 
Annexure — IV 
Security Deposit Rates 
Description Security I)eposit 
Residential A-I 
Urban Rs. 1,220/ kW 
Rural Rs. 610 / kW 
Commercial A-2 
Urban Rs. 1,810/kW 
Rural Rs. 920 / kW 
General Services A-3 To be determine by NEPRA 
Industrial 
BI Rs. 1,580/kw 
B2 Rs.2,010IkW 
133 Rs. 2,890 I kW 
B4 Rs. 3,560 / kW 
Single Point Supply 
CI Supply at 400 Rs. 1,670 / kW 
C2 Supply at 11 kV Rs. 2,080 I kW 
C3 Supply above 11 kV Rs. 2,740 / kW 
Agricultural Tube-wells - Tariff D 
Agricultural Tube-wells (including scarp/ lift pump) Rs. 15000 lump sum 
Public Lighting - Tariff G Rs. 3,240 I kW 
Tariff H - Residential Colonies attached to industries Rs. 1,560 / kW 
Special Contracts - Tariff K (AJK) Rs. 2,570/ kW 
Traction - I Rs. 610/ kW 
Special Contracts - Tariff K (Rawat) Rs. 2,900/ kW 
ç) 
0 EP !?, 
c_) 
±fi APPROVED •' 
BY 
THE AUTHORITY 
7 
 * 
NE P  ' 
87 
Annexure - V 
Percentage of Load Factor for Different Types of Connections 
Sr. No. CATEGORY OF CONNECTION Load factor to 
be charged 
A-i GENERAL SUPPLY TARIFF - RESIDENTIAL 
01 Single Phase 20% 
02 Three Phase 25% 
A-2 GENERAL SUPPLY TARIFF - COMMERCIAL 
03 Single Phase 20% 
04 Three phase 25% 
A-3 GENERAL SERVICES 
05 Single phase 15% 
06 Three phase 20% 
13 IN1)USTRIAL SUPPLY 
07 B-i except for ice factories, Cold Storage, Plastic Molding, 
Rice shellers 40% 
08 B-2, except Ice Factories, Cold Storage, Plastic Molding, 
Rice shellers 50°/ 
09 Ice Factory, Cold Storage, 70% 
10 Plastic Molding Industry, Rice Sheller 50% 
11 13-3 'I'extile Mills and Steel Furnaces Melting Industry and 
all other continuous industry 60°/ 0 
12 Other normal Industry like Engineering Works 50% 
13 Flour Mills B-2 & B-3 40% 
14 B-4 50% 
TUBEWELLS 
15 Agricultural Tubewells installed in perennial area 15% 
I 6 Agricultural Tubewells installed in non-perennial area/river 
belts 50/0 
17 Searp Tubewells 50% 
MISCELLANEOUS 
18 Tariff H for I-lousing Colonies 15% 
19 Other Bulk Power supply 15% 
20 Temporary Supply (El, E2) 20 % 
21 Street Lights (G) 40% 
88 
Annexure - VI 
Load Assessment Criteria for Housing Societies, High-rise Buildings, 
Commercial Plazas, Multi-storey Buildings, etc. 
Description Size of Plot Load Assessment 
03 MarIa 3.15 kW 
05 MarIa 5.0 kW 
07 MarIa 5.70 kW 
Individual I-louses 10 MarIa 6.60 kW 
12 MarIa 7.45 kW 
14 MarIa 8.75kw 
01 Kanal 10.61 kW 
02Kanal 17.74kw 
Farm houses! plots (Area: above 2 kanals) 
• Load of first 2 Kanals will be assessed @ 17.74 kW. 
• area of rest of the plot will be assessed @ 0.4 kW per Marla 
Apartments 
Area Maximum Load Assessment 
Urban Areas Rural Areas 
Upto 700 Sq.ft 
125 w/100 sq.ft 
+ 10 % flats with 
1 ACof1.5 kW 
100 w/100 sq.ft  with 
noAC 
70 1-900 Sq. ft 
150 w/100 sq.ft 
+ 25 % flats with 
1 ACof1.5 kW 
125 w/100 sq.ft 
with no AC 
901-1200 Sq. ft 
175w/100 sq.ft 
+ 50% flats 
with 1 AC of 1.5 kW 
150 w/100 sq.ft 
+ 10% flats with 
1 AC of 1.5 kW REG0 
b 
1201-1600 Sq. ft 
175w/100sq.ft 
+ 100% flats with 
2 ACs of 1.5 kW each 
150w/100sq.ft 
+ 25 % flats with 
1 AC of 1.5kW 
Above 
1600 Sq. ft 
200w/100sq.ft 
+ 100 % flats with 
3ACsofl.5kW 
175w/100sq.ft 
+ 50 % flats with 
2ACof1.5kW 
Shops I Clinics Any Area 1000 w/100 sq.ft 
(AC load inclusive) 
500 w/100 sq.ft 
(AC load inclusive ) 
Super Market Any Area l000wll00 sq.ft 
(AC load inclusiveL 
800 wI100 sq.ft 
(AC load inclusive) 
Offices Any Area 700 w/100 sq.ft 
(AC load inclusive) 
500 wI100 sq.ft 
(AC load inclusive) 
Covered Godown Any area 50 wll00 sq.ft 40 w/100 sq.ft 
Open Godown Any Area 25 w/100 sq.ft 20 w/100 sq.ft 
Corridors 
Any area 
residential 40 w/100 sq.ft 30 wllOO sq.ft 
60 w!100 sq.ft 50w/lOU sq.ft Any area offices 
89 
APPROVED 
BY > 
THEAUTHORITY - 
90 
Any area 
commercial 
activity 
75 w/100 sq.ft 60 w1100 sq.ft 
Parking! Air Raid 
Shelter Any Area 60 w /100 sq.ft 60 w /100 sq.ft 
Marriage halls Any Area 
250 WI 100 sq.ft 
I AC of 1.5 kW 
for office 
250 W/ 100 sq.ft 
+ I AC of 1.5 kW 
for office 
Banquets Any Area 1000 W/ 100 sq.ft 
(AC load inclusive) 
700 WI 100 sq.ft 
(AC load inclusive) 
Community Hall I 
Centre AnyArea 250 WI 100 sq.ft 
+ I ACof1.5kW 
200 W/ 100 sq.ft 
+ 1 ACof1.5 kW 
Restaurants Any Area 1000 w/100 sq.ft 
(AC load inclusive) 
800 w/100 sq.ft 
(AC load inclusive) 
Open Air Restaurants Any Area 250w / l0osq.ft 200w I 100sq.ft 
Children Play Area 
(Covered/Within 
Boundary) 
Any Area 150w / 100sq.ft 100w! lO0sq.ft 
1-IcaIth Club / 
Recreation Club Any Area 500 w/100 sq.ft 
(AC load inclusive) 
200w/100 sq.ft 
(AC load inclusive) 
Swimming Pool Any Area 5 kW 4 kW 
Plant Nursery Any Area 4 kW 3 kW 
Schools / Colleges! 
University/Coaching! 
Centre/Il' Institutes 
Any Area 
150 w/100 sq.ft for 
constructed area with 
1 AC of 1.5 kw for office 
100 w/100 sq.ft 
For constructed area 
Parks Any Area 3 kW 2 kW 
Madrassa Any Area 150 w/100 sq.ft. 100 w/100 sq.ft. 
Places Of Worship Any Area 150 w/100 sq.ft. 100 w/100 sq.ft. 
1-lostel Any Area 100 w/100 sq.ft. AC load 
as per actual 
100 w/100 sq.ft and 
AC load as per actual 
Library Any Area 400 w/100 sq.ft 
(inclusive AC load) 
300 w/100 sq.ft and 
AC load as per actual. 
Snooker Club Any Area 500 w/ 100 sq.ft 
(AC load inclusive) 
250 w/100 sq.ft and 
AC load asper actual 
Lift - 
7 kW OR as per technical 
specifications 
7kW OR 
as per technical 
specifications 
Street Lighting - 
60W (LED) per pole 
100 W (others) per pole 
60W (LED) per pole 
100 W (others) 
per pole 
Water Pump - 
5 kW OR as per technical 
specifications 
5kW OR 
as per technical 
specifications 
pj'PROVEO 
B( 
ThE 0 
Note: 
(1): Transformer Loading Capacity shall be taken as 80% for assessment. 
(II): The above load assessment criteria is for determination of ultimate load demand of 
any un-electrified I-lousing society/housing schemes/colony/Commercial Plaza/Fligh Rise Building! 
Multistorey Building for the purpose of electrification design. The load of premises such as hospitals, 
hotels, petrol pumps, etc have to be assessed as per applied load/information provided by the 
consumer/applicant. 1-lowever, at the time of providing individual connections; the load declared in 
the Application Form by the applicant will be considered as the connected load, subject to provision 
of the test report issued by the Electric Inspector or his authorized wiring contractor and verified by 
DISCO (DISCO to insert its name). 
91 
